CHAPTER 1 

FATHER ANGEL sat up with a solemn effort. He rubbed his eyelids with the bones of his 

hands,  pushed  aside  the  embroidered  mosquito  netting,  and  remained  sitting  on  the  bare 

mattress, pensive for an instant, the time indispensable for him to realize that he was alive 

and  to  remember  the  date  and  its  corresponding  day  on  the  calendar  of  saints.  Tuesday, 

October  fourth,  he  thought;  and  in  a  low  voice  he  said:  "St.  Francis  of  Assisi."  He  got 

dressed without washing and without praying. He was large, ruddy, with the peaceful figure 

of a domesticated ox, and he moved like an ox, with thick, sad gestures. After attending to 

the buttoning of  his cassock, with  the languid attention and  the  movements with which a 

harp is tuned, he took down the bar and opened the door to the courtyard. The spikenards in 

the rain brought back the words of a song to him. 

"'The sea will grow larger with my tears,' " he sighed. 

The  bedroom  was  connected  to  the  church  by  an  inside  veranda  bordered  with 

flowerpots and paved with loose bricks between which the October grass was beginning to 

grow. Before going into the church, Father ءngel went to the toilet. He urinated abundantly, 

holding his breath so as not to inhale the intense ammonia smell which brought out tears in 

him.  Then  he  went  out  onto  the  veranda,  remembering:  "This  bark  will  bear  me  to  your 

dreams." At the narrow little door of the church he smelled the vapor of the spikenards for 

the last time. 

Inside it smelled bad. There was a long  nave, also paved with loose bricks, and 

with a single door opening on the square. Father ءngel went directly to the bell tower. He 

saw  that  the  counterweights  of  the  clock  were  more  than  a  yard  above  his  head  and  he 

thought that it was still wound up enough to last a week. The mosquitoes attacked him. He 

squashed one on the back of  his  neck with a violent slap and wiped his hand on  the bell 

rope. Then from up above he heard the visceral sound of the complicated mechanical gears 

and immediately thereafter--dull, deep--the bell tolling five o'clock in his stomach. 

 

He waited until the last resonance died down. Then he grabbed the rope with both 

hands, wrapped it around  his wrists, and  made  the cracked bronzes ring with peremptory 

conviction. He had turned sixty-one years of age and the effort of ringing the bells was too 

strenuous  for  him,  but  he  had  always  made  the  call  to  mass  personally  and  that  exercise 

strengthened his morale. 

Trinidad pushed open the street door while the bells were ringing and went to  the corner 

where she had set the traps for the mice. She found something that brought on repugnance 

and pleasure in her at the same time: a small massacre. 

She  opened  the  first  trap,  picked  up  the  mouse  by  the  tail  with  her  thumb  and 

forefinger, and threw it into a cardboard box. Father ءngel had just opened the door onto the 

square. 

"Good morning, Father," Trinidad said. 

His baritone voice didn't register. The desolate square, the almond trees sleeping in 

the rain, the village motionless in the inconsolable October dawn, produced in him a feeling 

of abandonment. But when he grew accustomed to the sound of the rain, he made out, in the 

rear of the square, clear and somewhat unreal, Pastor's clarinet. Only then did he respond to 

the good morning. 

"Pastor wasn't with the people serenading," he said. 

"No," Trinidad confirmed. She approached with the box of dead mice. "It was all 

guitars." 

"They spent almost  two hours on one silly little song,"  the priest said. " 'The sea 

will grow larger with my tears.' Isn't that how it goes?" 

"That's Pastor's new song," she said. 

Motionless  by  the  door,  the  priest  experienced  an  instantaneous  fascination.  For 

many years he had heard Pastor's clarinet as two blocks away he would sit down to practice 

every  day  at  five  o'clock  with  his  stool  up  against  the  prop  of  his  dovecote.  It  was  the 

mechanism of the town functioning with precision: first the five bell tolls of five o'clock; 

 

then the first call to mass, and then Pastor's clarinet in the courtyard of his house, purifying 

the pigeon-filth-laden air with diaphanous and articulated notes. 

"The music is good," the priest reacted, "but the lyrics are silly. The words can roll 

either backward or forward and it won't  make any difference: 'This bark will bear me  to 

your dreams.'" 

He turned  half around, smiling at  his own discovery, and went  to light the altar. 

Trinidad  followed  him.  She  was  wearing  a  long  white  robe  with  sleeves  down  to  her 

knuckles and the blue silk sash of a lay order. Her eyes were of an intense black under the 

merged eyebrows. 

"They were around here all night," the priest said. 

"At Margot Ramيrez' place," said Trinidad distractedly, shaking the dead mice in 

the box. "But last night there was something better than the serenade." 

The priest stopped and fixed his eyes of silent blue on her. 

"What was that?" 

"Lampoons," said Trinidad. And she let out a nervous little laugh. 

Three  houses  beyond,  Cesar  Montero  was  dreaming  about  elephants.  He'd  seen 

them at the  movies on Sunday. Rain  had  fallen a  half  hour before the  film was over and 

now it was continuing in his dream. 

Cesar Montero turned the whole weight of his monumental body against the wall 

while terrified natives fled the herd of elephants. His wife pushed him softly, but neither of 

them woke  up. "We're leaving," he  murmured, and recovered his initial position. Then  he 

woke up. At that moment the second call to mass sounded. 

It  was  a  room  with  large  screened  openings.  The  window  on  the  square,  also 

screened, had a cretonne curtain with yellow flowers. On the small night table there was a 

portable radio, a lamp, and a clock with a luminous dial. On the other side, against the wall, 

an  enormous  wardrobe  with  mirrored  doors.  While  he  was  putting  on  his  riding  boots, 

Cesar  Montero  began  to  hear  Pastor's  clarinet.  The  raw  leather  laces  were  stiffened  with 

mud. He pulled hard on them, drawing them  through his closed hand, which was rougher 

 

than the leather of the laces. Then he looked for his spurs, but he couldn't find them under 

the bed. He went on getting dressed in the dark, trying not to make any noise so as not to 

awaken his wife. As he was buttoning up his shirt he looked at the time on the clock on the 

table, then went back to looking for the spurs under the bed. First he searched for them with 

his hands. Progressively, he got down on all fours and started scratching under the bed. His 

wife woke up. 

"What are you looking for?" 

"The spurs." 

"They're hanging behind the wardrobe," she said. "You put them there yourself on 

Saturday." 

She  pushed  aside  the  mosquito  netting  and  turned  on  the  light.  He  stood  up, 

shamefaced.  He  was  monumental,  with  square,  solid  shoulders,  but  his  movements  were 

elastic, even when he wore his boots, the soles of which looked like two strips of wood. His 

health was somewhat barbarous. He seemed of an indefinite age, but the skin on his neck 

showed that it had gone beyond fifty. He sat on the bed to put on his spurs. 

"It's  still  raining,"  she  said,  feeling  that  her  aching  bones  had  absorbed  the 

dampness of the night. "I feel like a sponge." 

Small, bony, with a long, sharp  nose, she  had the quality of  not seeming to  have 

finished waking  up. She  tried to see the rain  through the curtain. Cesar Montero finished 

adjusting his spurs, stood up, and stamped several times on the floor. The house shook with 

the copper spurs. 

"The jaguar gets fat in October," he said. 

But his wife, in ecstasy over Pastor's melody, didn't hear him. When she looked at 

him again he was combing his hair in front of the wardrobe, his legs apart and his head bent 

over, because he was too tall for the mirrors. 

She was following Pastor's melody in a low voice. 

"They were plucking that song all night long," he said. 

"It's very pretty," she said. 

 

She untied a ribbon from the headboard of the bed, gathered up her hair at the back 

of her neck, and sighed, completely awake: " 'I'll stay in your dreams until death.' " He paid 

no attention to her. From a drawer in the wardrobe, where, besides some jewels, there were 

a  small  woman's  watch  and  a  fountain  pen,  he  took  out  a  billfold with  some  money.  He 

extracted four bills and returned the wallet to the same place. Then he put six shotgun shells 

in his shirt pocket. 

"If the rain keeps up, I won't be back on Saturday," he said. 

When  he  opened  the  door  to  the  courtyard,  he  paused  for  an  instant  on  the 

threshold, breathing in the somber smell of October while his eyes became accustomed to 

the darkness. He was going to close the door, when the alarm clock in the bedroom rang. 

His wife leaped out of bed. He remained in suspense, his hand on the knob, until 

she turned off the alarm. Then he looked at her for the first time, pensively. 

"Last night I dreamed about elephants," he said. 

Then he closed the door and went to saddle up the mule. 

The  rain  grew  stronger  before  the  third  call.  A  low  wind  pulled  the  last  rotten 

leaves off the almond  trees on  the square. The street lights went out but  the  houses were 

still  locked.  Cesar  Montero  rode  the  mule  into  the  kitchen  and  without  dismounting, 

shouted  to  his  wife  to  bring  him  his  raincoat.  He  took  off  the  double-barreled  shotgun 

which he had slung over his shoulder and fastened it horizontally with the saddle straps. His 

wife appeared in the kitchen with the raincoat. 

"Wait for it to clear," she told him without conviction. 

He put the raincoat on silently. Then he looked toward the courtyard. 

"It won't clear until December." 

She accompanied him with her gaze to the other end of the veranda. The rain was 

pelting the rusty sheets on the roof, but  he was going. Spurring the  mule,  he  had to bend 

over in the saddle so as not to hit the crossbeam of the door as he went into the courtyard. 

The  drops  from  the  eaves  exploded  like  buckshot  on  his  back.  From  the  main  door  he 

shouted without turning his head: "See you Saturday." 

 

"See you Saturday," she said. 

The only door on the square that was open was that of the church. Cesar Montero 

looked up and saw the sky, heavy and low, two feet above his head. He crossed himself and 

spurred the mule, making it whirl about several times on its hind legs until the animal got a 

grip on  the soapy soil. That was when  he saw the piece of paper stuck  to the door of  his 

house. 

He read it without dismounting. The water had dissolved the  colors, but the  text, 

written with a brush in rough printed letters, could still be made out. Cesar Montero brought 

the mule over to the wall, pulled off the paper, and tore it to bits. 

With a slap of the reins he pressed the mule into a short trot, good for many hours. 

He  left  the  square  through  a  narrow  and  twisted  street  with  adobe-walled  houses  whose 

doors turned out the dregs of sleep when they were opened. He caught the smell of coffee. 

Only when he left the last houses of the town behind did he turn the mule around and, with 

the  same  short  and  regular  trot,  return  to  the  square  and  stop  in  front  of  Pastor's  house. 

There he dismounted, took off the shotgun, and tied the mule to the prop, performing each 

action in the precise time needed. 

The door was unbolted, blocked at the bottom by a giant sea shell. Cesar Montero 

went  into  the  small  shadowy  living  room.  He  heard  a  sharp  note  and  then  an  expectant 

silence. 

He passed by four chairs arranged around a small table with a woolen cloth and a 

vase with artificial flowers. Finally he stopped in  front of the courtyard door, threw back 

the hood of his raincoat, released the safety catch of the shotgun by feel, and with a calm, 

almost friendly voice, called: "Pastor." 

Pastor  appeared  in  the  frame  of  the  door,  screwing  off  the  mouthpiece  of  the 

clarinet.  He  was  a  thin,  straight  lad  with  an  incipient  line  of  mustache  trimmed  with 

scissors. When  he saw Cesar Montero with  his heels planted on the earthen  floor and the 

shotgun at waist level pointed at him, Pastor opened his mouth. But he didn't say anything. 

He turned pale and smiled. Cesar Montero first firmed his heels against the ground, then the 

 

butt, with  his elbow, against  his hip; then he clenched  his teeth and, at the same time, the 

trigger. The house shook with the explosion, but Cesar Montero didn't know whether it was 

before or after the commotion that from the other side of the door he saw Pastor dragging 

himself with the undulation of a worm along a furrow of tiny bloody feathers. 

The  mayor  had begun to  fall asleep at the  moment of the shot.  He'd spent  three 

sleepless nights in torment because of the pain in his molar. That morning, at the first call to 

mass, he took his eighth analgesic. The pain gave way. The crackling of the rain on the zinc 

roof  helped  him  fall  asleep,  but  the  molar  was  still  throbbing  painlessly  while  he  slept. 

When he  heard the shot  he awoke with a leap and grabbed the cartridge belt and revolver 

that he always left on a chair beside the hammock, within reach of his left hand. But since 

he could hear only the noise of the drizzle, he thought it had been a nightmare and he felt 

the pain again. 

He  had  a  slight  fever.  In  the  mirror  he  noticed  that  his  cheek  was  swelling.  He 

opened a jar of mentholated vaseline and rubbed it on the painful part, tight and unshaven. 

Suddenly  he  caught  the  sound  of  distant  voices  through  the  rain.  He  went  out  onto  the 

balcony.  The  residents  of  the  street,  some  in  their  nightclothes,  were  running  toward  the 

square. A boy turned his head toward him, raised his arms, and shouted without stopping: 

"César Montero has killed Pastor." 

On the square, César Montero was walking around with his shotgun pointed at the 

crowd. The mayor recognized him with a little trouble. He took his revolver in his left hand 

and started forward toward the center of the square. The people made way for him. Out of 

the poolroom came a policeman holding his rifle, aiming at César Montero. The mayor said 

to him in a low voice: "Don't shoot,  you animal." He holstered his revolver, took the rifle 

away from the policeman, and continued toward the center of the square. 

"César Montero," the mayor shouted, "give me that shotgun." 

César Montero hadn't seen him until then. With a leap he turned toward him. The 

mayor tightened his finger on the trigger, but he didn't fire. 

"Come get it," César Montero shouted. 

 

The mayor was holding the rifle with his left hand and was wiping his eyelids with 

the  right.  He  calculated  every  step,  his  finger  tense  on  the  trigger  and  his  eyes  fixed  on 

César Montero. Suddenly he stopped and spoke with a friendly cadence: "Toss the shotgun 

on the ground, César. Don't do anything else foolish." 

César Montero drew back. The mayor continued on, his finger tight on the trigger. 

He didn't  move a single muscle in  his body until César Montero  lowered the shotgun and 

dropped it. Then the mayor realized that he was wearing only his pajama bottoms, that he 

was sweating in the rain, and that his tooth had stopped aching. 

The  houses opened  up. Two policemen armed with rifles ran to the center of the 

square. The crowd poured in behind them. The policemen leaped in a half turn and shouted, 

pointing their rifles: "Back." 

The mayor shouted in a calm voice, not looking at anyone: "Clear the square." 

The crowd dispersed. The mayor frisked César Montero without making him take 

off  his  raincoat.  He  found  four  shells  in  his  shirt  pocket,  and  in  the  back  pants  pocket  a 

switchblade knife with a bone handle. In another pocket  he found a notebook, a ring with 

three  keys,  and  four  one-hundred-peso  bills.  Impassively,  César  Montero  let  himself  be 

searched,  his  arms  open,  moving  his  body  only  to  facilitate  the  operation.  When  he  was 

finished,  the  mayor  called  the  two  policemen,  gave  them  the  things,  and  turned  César 

Montero over to them. 

"Take  him  to  the  second  floor  of  the  town  hall,"  he  ordered.  "I'm  holding  you 

responsible for him." 

César  Montero  took  off  the  raincoat.  He  gave  it  to  one  of  the  policemen  and 

walked between them, indifferent to the rain and the perplexity of the people concentrated 

on  the  square.  The  mayor,  thoughtfully,  watched  him  go  away.  Then  he  turned  to  the 

crowd, made a gesture of shooing chickens, and shouted: "Break it up." 

Drying  his  face  with  his  bare  arm,  he  crossed  the  square  and  went  into  Pastor's 

house. 

 

Collapsed in a chair was the dead  man's  mother, in  the  midst of women  fanning 

her with pitiless diligence. The mayor pushed a woman aside. "Give her air," he said. The 

woman turned toward him. 

"She'd just left for mass," she said. 

"All right," the mayor said, "but now let her breathe." 

Pastor was on the porch, face down by the dovecote, on a bed of bloody feathers. 

There  was  an  intense  smell  of  pigeon  filth.  A  group  of  men  were  trying  to  lift  the  body 

when the mayor appeared in the doorway. 

"Back off," he said. 

The  men  put  the  body  back  down  among  the  feathers,  in  the  same  position  that 

they  had  found  it,  and  withdrew  silently.  After  examining  the  body,  the  mayor  rolled  it 

over.  There  was  a  dispersion  of  tiny  feathers.  At  waist  level  there  were  more  feathers, 

sticking to the still warm and living blood. He pushed them away with his hands. The shirt 

was torn and the belt buckle broken. Underneath the shirt he saw the disclosed viscera. The 

wound had stopped bleeding. 

"It was with a jaguar gun," one of the men said. 

The mayor stood up. He cleaned off the bloody feathers on a prop of the dovecote, 

still looking at the corpse. He ended by wiping his hand on his pajama pants and said to the 

group: "Don't move him from there." 

"He's going to leave him stretched out there," one of the men said. 

"We have to draw up the removal document," the mayor said. 

Inside  the  house  the  wailing  of  the  women  began.  The  mayor  made  his  way 

through  the shouts and the suffocating smells that were beginning to cut off  the air in the 

room. At the street door he ran into Father ءngel. 

"He's dead," the priest exclaimed, perplexed. 

"Dead as a pig," the mayor answered. 

 

The houses around the square were open. The rain had stopped but the heavy sky 

floated over the roofs without so much as a chink for the sun. Father ءngel held the mayor 

back by the arm. 

"César  Montero  is  a  good  man,"  he  said.  "This  must  have  been  a  moment  of 

confusion." 

"I know that," the mayor said impatiently. "Don't worry, Father, nothing's going to 

happen to him. Go inside; that's where they need you." 

He went away with a certain haste and ordered the policemen to call off the guard. 

The crowd, held back behind a line until then, ran toward Pastor's house. The mayor went 

into the poolroom, where a policeman was waiting for him with a set of clean clothing: his 

lieutenant's uniform. 

Ordinarily the establishment wasn't open at  that  hour. On  that day, before seven 

o'clock, it was crowded. Around the tables which seated four or against the bar, men were 

drinking coffee. Most of them still wore their pajama tops and slippers. 

The mayor got undressed in front of everyone, half dried himself with the pajama 

pants, and began to dress in silence, hanging on  the comments.  When he left the place he 

was completely informed of the details of the incident. 

"Have a care," he shouted from the door. "Anybody who stirs up the town on me 

I'll clap in the poky." 

He went down the stone-paved street without saying hello to anyone but aware of 

the town's excited state.  He was young, with relaxed  movements, and with every step  he 

revealed his aim of making his presence felt. 

At seven o'clock the launches that carried cargo and passengers three times a week 

whistled as they left the pier, with no one paying the attention they did on other days. The 

mayor went down along the arcade, where the Syrian merchants were beginning to display 

their  colorful  wares.  Dr.  Octavio  Giraldo,  an  ageless  physician  with  a  headful  of  patent 

leather curls, was watching  the launches  go downstream  from  the door of  his office. He, 

too, was wearing his pajama top and slippers. 

 

"Doctor," the mayor said, "get dressed so you can go perform the autopsy." 

The doctor looked at him, intrigued. He revealed a long row of solid white teeth. 

"So we're doing autopsies now," he said, and added: "That's great progress, obviously." 

The mayor tried to smile, but the sensitivity of his cheek prevented it. He covered 

his mouth with his hand. 

"What's the matter?" the doctor asked. 

"A bastardly molar." 

Dr. Giraldo seemed disposed to conversation. But the mayor was in a hurry. 

At the end of the dock he knocked on the door of a house that had walls of ditch 

reeds without  mud and a palm roof that came down almost to water level. A woman with 

greenish  skin,  seven  months  pregnant,  opened  for  him.  She  was  barefoot.  The  mayor 

pushed her to one side and went into the shadowy living room. 

"Judge," he called. 

Judge  Arcadio  appeared  at  the  inside  door,  dragging  his  clogs.  He  was  wearing 

drill pants, with no belt, held up under his navel and naked torso. 

"Get a body removal form ready," the mayor said. 

Judge Arcadio gave a whistle of perplexity. 

"Where did you get that novel idea from?" 

The  mayor  followed  him  slowly  into  the  bedroom.  "This  is  different,"  he  said, 

opening the window to purify the sleep-laden air. "It's best to do things properly." He wiped 

the dust from his hands onto his pressed pants and asked, without the slightest indication of 

sarcasm: "Do you know what a body removal order is?" 

"Of course," the judge said. 

The  mayor examined  his hands at  the window. "Get  your secretary so he can do 

what writing there is," he said, again with  no veiled intention. Then  he  turned  toward the 

girl, the palms of his hands held out. There were traces of blood. 

"Where can I wash?" 

"In the tank," she said. 

 

The  mayor  went  out  into  the  courtyard.  The  girl  looked  in  the  chest  for  a  clean 

towel and wrapped a cake of scented soap in it. 

She went out into the courtyard just as the  mayor was  returning  to  the bedroom 

shaking his hands. 

"I was bringing you the soap," she said. 

"It's all right this way," the mayor said. He looked at the palms of his hands again. 

He took the towel and dried himself, pensive, looking at Judge Arcadio. 

"He was covered with pigeon feathers," he said. 

Sitting on the bed, taking measured sips from a cup of black coffee, he waited until 

Judge Arcadio finished getting dressed. The girl followed them through the living room. 

"Until that molar's pulled out, the swelling won't go down," she said to the mayor. 

He pushed Judge Arcadio out into the street, turned to look at her, and touched her 

bulging belly with his forefinger. 

"What about this swelling? When will it go down?" 

"Any day now," she said. 

Father ءngel didn't take his customary evening walk. After the funeral he stopped to chat at 

a house in the lower part of town and stayed there until dusk. He felt well, in spite of the 

fact that the prolonged rains ordinarily brought on pain in his spine. When he got home the 

street lights were on. 

Trinidad  was watering  the  flowers  on  the  porch.  The  priest  asked  her  about  the 

unconsecrated  hosts  and  she  answered  that  she'd  put  them  on  the  main  altar.  The  fog  of 

mosquitoes enveloped him when  he lighted the lamp in his room. Before closing the door 

he  fumigated  the room endlessly with insecticide, sneezing because of  the smell. He was 

sweating when he finished. He changed the black cassock for the white mended one that he 

wore in private and went to ring the Angelus. 

Back in the room, he put a pan on the fire and started frying a piece of meat while 

he sliced an onion. Then he put everything on a plate where there was a piece of marinated 

 

cassava  and  some  cold  rice,  leftovers  from  lunch.  He  took  the  plate  to  the  table  and  sat 

down to eat. 

He ate it all at the same time, cutting little pieces, of everything and piling them on 

his fork with  the  knife. He chewed conscientiously,  grinding everything down  to  the last 

grain with  his silver-capped molars, but with  his lips closed.  While he did so,  he left the 

knife  and  fork  on  the  edges  of  the  plate  and  examined  the  room  with  a  continuous  and 

perfectly attentive look. Opposite  him were the shelves with the thick books of  the parish 

archives. In  the corner a wicker rocking chair with a  tall back and a cushion sewn on at 

head  level.  Behind  the  rocker  there  was  a screen  with  a  crucifix  hanging  on  it  next  to  a 

calendar advertising cough medicine. On the other side of the screen was his bedroom. 

At the end of  his  meal, Father ءngel felt asphyxiated. He  unwrapped a morsel of 

guava paste, filled his glass up to the brim with water, and ate the sugary sweet looking at 

the calendar. Between each mouthful he took a sip of water, without taking his eyes off the 

calendar. Finally he belched and wiped his lips with his sleeve. For nineteen  years he had 

eaten  that  way,  alone  in  his  study,  repeating  every  movement  with  scrupulous  precision. 

He'd never felt ashamed of his solitude. 

After rosary, Trinidad asked him for money to buy arsenic. The priest refused for 

the  third  time,  arguing  that  the  traps  were  sufficient.  Trinidad  insisted:  "It's  just  that  the 

littlest mice steal the cheese and don't get caught in the traps. That's why it's best to poison 

the cheese." 

The priest admitted to himself that Trinidad was right. But before he could express 

it, the  noisy loudspeaker at the  movie theater across the street penetrated  the quiet of the 

church.  First  it  was  a  dull  growl.  Then  the  scratching  of  the  needle  on  the  record  and 

immediately a mambo that started off with a strident trumpet. 

"Is there a show tonight?" the priest asked. 

Trinidad said there was. 

"Do you know what they're showing?" 

 

"Tarzan  and  the  Green  Goddess,  "  Trinidad  said.  "The  same  one  they  couldn't 

finish on Sunday because of the rain. Approved for all." 

Father ءngel went to the bottom of the belfry and tolled the bell twelve slow times. 

Trinidad was puzzled. 

"You're wrong, Father," she said, waving  her hands and with an agitated  glow in 

her eyes. "It's a movie that's approved for all. Remember, you didn't ring  the bell once on 

Sunday." 

"But it's a lack of consideration for the town," the priest said, drying the sweat on 

his neck. And he repeated, panting: "A lack of consideration." 

Trinidad understood. 

"All you  had  to do was  to  have seen  that funeral,"  the priest said. "All the  men 

fighting for a chance to carry the coffin." 

Then  he sent  the  girl off, closed the door to  the deserted square, and put out the 

lights in the church. On the porch, on his way back to his bedroom, he slapped his forehead, 

remembering  that  he'd  forgotten  to  give  Trinidad  the  money  for  the  arsenic.  But  he'd 

forgotten about it again before he reached his room. 

A short  time later, sitting at  his desk,  he got ready to  finish the letter  he'd begun 

the  night  before.  He'd  unbuttoned  his  cassock  down  to  his  stomach  and  was  putting  the 

writing pad, the inkwell, and the blotter in order on the desk while he reached in his pockets 

for his glasses. Then he remembered having left them in the cassock that he'd worn to the 

funeral and got up to get them. He'd reread what he'd written the night before and started a 

new paragraph when three knocks sounded on the door. 

"Come in." 

It was the manager of the movie house. Small, pale, very clean-shaven, he wore an 

expression of fatality. He was dressed in white linen, spotless, and was wearing two-toned 

shoes.  Father  ءngel  signaled  him  to  sit  in  the  wicker  rocking  chair,  but  he  took  a 

handkerchief out of  his pants, unfolded it scrupulously, dusted off the step, and sat down 

 

with his legs apart. Father  ءngel saw then that it wasn't a revolver but a flashlight  that  he 

wore in his belt. 

"What can I do for you?" the priest asked. 

"Father,"  the  manager  said,  almost  breathless,  "forgive  me  for  butting  into  your 

affairs, but tonight it must have been a mistake." 

The priest nodded his head and waited. 

"Tarzan and the Green Goddess is a movie approved for all," the manager went on. 

"You yourself recognized that on Sunday." 

The priest tried to interrupt him, but the manager raised one hand as a signal that 

he hadn't finished yet. 

"I've  accepted  the  business  of  the  bell,"  he  said,  "because  it's  true,  there  are 

immoral  movies.  But  there's  nothing  wrong  with  this  one.  We  intended  to  show  it  on 

Saturday for the children's matinee." 

Father  ءngel  explained  to  him  then  that,  indeed,  the  movie  had  no  moral 

classification on the list that he received in the mail every month. 

"But  having  a  movie  today,"  he  went  on,  "shows  a  lack  of  consideration  since 

there's been a death in town. That, too, is a part of morality," 

The manager looked at him. 

"Last  year  the  police  themselves  killed  a  man  inside  the  movies  and  as  soon  as 

they took the body out the show went on," he exclaimed. 

"It's different now," the priest said. "The mayor's a changed man." 

"When they hold elections again the killing will come back," the manager replied, 

exasperated. "Always, ever since the town has been a town, the same thing happens." 

"We'll see," the priest said. 

The manager examined him with a look of grief. When he spoke again, shaking his 

shirt to ventilate his chest, his voice had acquired a tone of supplication. 

 

"It's  the  third  movie  approved  for  all  that  we've  had  this  year,"  he  said.  "On 

Sunday three reels were left because of the rain and there are a lot of people who want to 

know how it comes out." 

"The bell has already been rung," the priest said. 

The manager let out a sigh of desperation. He waited, looking at the prelate face on 

and no longer thinking about anything except the intense heat in the study. 

"So there's nothing that can be done?" 

Father ءngel shook his head. 

The manager slapped his knees and got up. 

"All right," he said. "What can we do." 

He folded his handkerchief again, dried the sweat on  his  neck, and examined the 

study with bitter care. 

"This place is an inferno," he said. 

The priest accompanied him to the door. He threw the bolt and sat down to finish 

the letter. After reading it again from the beginning, he completed the interrupted paragraph 

and stopped to think. At that moment the music from the loudspeaker stopped. "We would 

like  to  announce  to  our  distinguished  clientele,"  an  impersonal  voice  said,  "that  tonight's 

show  has  been  canceled  because  this  establishment  also  wishes  to  join  the  town  in 

mourning." Father Angel, smiling, recognized the manager's voice. 

The heat grew more intense. The curate continued writing, with brief pauses to dry 

his sweat and reread what he had written, until two sheets were filled. He had just signed it 

when the rain let loose without warning. A vapor of damp earth penetrated the room. Father 

ءngel addressed the envelope, closed the inkwell, and was ready to  fold the letter. But first 

he read the last paragraph over again. Then he opened the inkwell and wrote a postscript:  

It's raining again. With this winter and the things I've told you about, I think  that 

bitter days await us.  

 

CHAPTER 2 

FRIDAY DAWNED warm and dry. Judge Arcadio, who boasted of having made love three 

times  a  night  ever  since  he'd  made  it  for  the  first  time,  broke  the  cords  of  the  mosquito 

netting that morning and fell to the floor with his wife at the supreme moment, wrapped up 

in the embroidered canopy. 

"Leave it  the way it is," she  murmured. "I'll fix it later." They arose completely 

naked from the midst of the confused nebula of the mosquito net. Judge Arcadio went to the 

chest  to  get  some  clean  underwear.  When  he  got  back  his  wife  was  dressed,  putting  the 

mosquito  netting in order. He passed by without looking at  her and sat down on the other 

side of the bed to put  his shoes on,  his breathing still heavy from love. She pursued  him. 

She rested her round, tense stomach against  his arm and sought  his ear with her teeth. He 

pushed her away softly. "Leave me alone," he said. 

She let out a laugh loaded with good health. She followed her husband to the other 

side of the room, poking her forefingers into his kidneys. "Giddy-ap, donkey," she said. He 

gave a leap and pushed her hands away. She left him alone and laughed again, but suddenly 

she became serious and shouted: "Oh, my God!" 

"What is it?" he asked. 

"The door was wide open," she shouted. "That's the limit of shamelessness." 

She went into the bathroom bursting with laughter. 

Judge Arcadio didn't wait for breakfast. Comforted by  the  mint in  his toothpaste, 

he went out onto the street. There was a copper sun. The  Syrians sitting by the doors of 

their shops were contemplating the peaceful river. As he passed by Dr. Giraldo's office he 

scratched his nail on the screen of the door and shouted without stopping: "Doctor, what's 

the best cure for a headache?" 

The  physician  answered  from  inside:  "Not  having  drunk  anything  the  night 

before." 

 

At the dock a group of women were commenting in loud voices about the contents 

of a new lampoon nailed up the night before. Since the day had dawned clear and rainless, 

the women who went by on their way to five o'clock mass had read it and now the whole 

town was informed. Judge  Arcadio didn't stop.  He  felt like an ox with a ring in  his nose 

being led to the poolroom. There he asked for a cold beer and an aspirin. It had just struck 

nine but the establishment was already full. 

"The whole town has a headache," Judge Arcadio said. 

He took the bottle to a table where three men seemed perplexed over their glasses 

of beer. He sat down in the empty seat. 

"Is that mess still going on?" he asked. 

"There were four of them this morning." 

"The  one  everybody  read,"  one  of  the  men  said,  "was  the  one  about  Raquel 

Contreras." 

Judge Arcadio swallowed the aspirin and drank his beer from the bottle. The first 

swallow was distasteful, but then his stomach adjusted and he felt new and without a past. 

"What did it say?" 

"Foolishness,"  the  man said. "That  the  trips she took  this year weren't  to  get  her 

dentures fitted, as she said, but to get an abortion." 

"They  didn't  have  to  go  to  the  trouble  of  putting  up  a  lampoon,"  Judge  Arcadio 

said. "Everybody was going around saying that." 

Even  though  the  hot  sun  hurt  him  in  the  depths  of  his  eyes  when  he  left  the 

establishment, he didn't feel the confused queasiness of dawn then. He went directly to the 

courthouse. His secretary, a skinny old man who was plucking a chicken, received him over 

the frames of his glasses with a look of incredulity. 

"To what do we owe this miracle?" 

"We have to get this mess in order," the judge said. 

 

The secretary went out into the courtyard, dragging his slippers, and he handed the 

half-plucked chicken over the wall to the cook at the hotel. Eleven months after taking over 

his post, Judge Arcadio had settled himself at his desk for the first time. 

The  run-down  office  was  divided  into  two  sections  by  a  wooden  railing.  In  the 

outer section there was a platform, also of wood,  under the picture of Justice blindfolded 

with a scale in her hand. Inside, two old desks facing each other, some shelves with dusty 

books, and the typewriter. On the wall over the judge's desk, a copper crucifix. On the wall 

opposite, a framed lithograph: a smiling, fat, bald man, his chest crossed by the presidential 

sash, and underneath a gilt inscription: Peace and Justice. The lithograph was the only new 

thing in the office. 

The secretary wrapped a handkerchief around his face and began to clean the desks 

with  a  duster.  "If  you  don't  cover  your  nose,  you'll  get  a  coughing  attack,"  he  said.  The 

advice wasn't taken. Judge Arcadio leaned back in the swivel chair, stretching out his legs 

to test the springs. 

"Will it fall over?" he asked. 

The secretary said no with his head. "When they killed Judge Vitela," he said, "the 

springs broke, but  they've been  fixed."  Without taking off  the  kerchief,  he went on: "The 

mayor  himself  ordered  it  fixed  when  the  government  changed  and  special  investigators 

began to appear from all sides." 

"The mayor wants this office to function," the judge said. 

He opened the center drawer, took out a bunch of keys, and went on opening the 

drawers  one  by  one.  They  were  full  of  papers.  He  examined  them  superficially,  picking 

them  up with  his  forefinger  to be sure that  there was nothing  to attract  his attention, and 

then he closed the drawers and put the items on the desk in order: a glass inkwell with one 

red and one blue receptacle, and a fountain pen for each receptacle, of the respective color. 

The ink had dried up. 

"The mayor likes you," the secretary said. 

 

Rocking in his chair, the judge followed him with a somber look as he cleaned the 

railing. The secretary contemplated him as if he never meant to forget him under that light, 

at that instant, and in  that position, and  he said, pointing at  him with  his finger: "Just the 

way you are now, exactly, was how Judge Vitela was when they shot him up." 

The  judge  touched  the  pronounced  veins  on  his  temples.  The  headache  was 

coming back. 

"I was there," the secretary went on, pointing to the typewriter, as he went to the 

other  side  of  the  railing.  Without  interrupting  his  tale,  he  leaned  on  the  railing  with  the 

duster aimed at Judge Arcadio like a rifle. He looked like a mail robber in a cowboy movie. 

"The three policemen stood like this," he said. "Judge  Vitela just  managed to see 

them and raise his hands, saying very slowly: 'Don't kill me.' But right away the chair went 

in one direction and he in the other, riddled with lead." 

Judge Arcadio squeezed his skull with his hands. He felt  his brain throbbing. The 

secretary took off his mask and hung the duster behind the door. "And all because when he 

was drunk he said he was here to guarantee the sanctity of the ballot," he said. He remained 

suspended,  looking  at  Judge  Arcadio,  who  doubled  over  the  desk  with  his  hands  on  his 

stomach. 

"Are you having trouble?" 

The judge said he was. He told him about the night before and asked him to go to 

the poolroom and get an aspirin and two cold beers. When he finished the first beer, Judge 

Arcadio couldn't find the slightest trace of remorse in his heart. He was lucid. 

The secretary sat in front of the typewriter. 

"What do we do now?" he asked. 

"Nothing," the judge said. 

"Then if you'll allow me, I'll go find Maria and help her pluck the chickens." 

The judge was against it. "This is an office for the administration of justice and not 

the plucking of chickens," he said. He examined his underling from top to bottom with an 

 

air of pity and added: "Furthermore, you've got to get rid of those slippers and come to the 

office with shoes on." 

The  heat became  more intense with the approach of  noon.  When  twelve o'clock 

struck, Judge Arcadio had consumed a dozen beers. He was floating in  memories. With a 

dreamy anxiety  he was talking about a past without privations, with long Sundays of sea 

and  insatiable  mulatto  women  who  made  love  standing  up  behind  the  doors  of 

entranceways.  "That's  what  life  was  like  then,"  he  said,  snapping  his  thumb  against  his 

forefinger at the clamiike stupor of the secretary, who listened without speaking, approving 

with his head. Judge Arcadio felt dull, but ever more alive in his memories. 

When one o'clock sounded in the belfry, the secretary showed signs of impatience. 

"The soup's getting cold," he said. 

The judge wouldn't let him get up. "A person doesn't always come across a man of 

talent in towns like this," he said, and the secretary thanked him, worn out by the heat, and 

shifted in his chair. It was an interminable Friday. Under the burning plates of the roof, the 

two men chatted a half hour more while the town cooked in its siesta stew. On the edge of 

exhaustion, the secretary then  made a reference to  the lampoons. Judge Arcadio shrugged 

his shoulders. 

"So you're following  that  half-wit stuff too,"  he said, using the  familiar form for 

the first time. 

The  secretary  had  no  desire  to  go  on  chatting,  debilitated  by  hunger  and 

suffocation, but he didn't think the lampoons were foolishness. "We've already had the first 

death," he said. "If things go on like this we're going to have a bad time of it." And he told 

the story of a town that was wiped out in seven days by lampoons. The inhabitants ended up 

killing each other off. The survivors dug up the bones of their dead and carried them off to 

be sure they'd never come back. 

The judge listened with an amused expression, slowly unbuttoning his shirt while 

the other talked. He figured that his secretary was a horror-story fan. 

"This is a very simple case out of a detective story," he said. 

 

The  underling  shook  his  head.  Judge  Arcadio  told  how  he'd  belonged  to  an 

organization at the university that was dedicated to the solving of police enigmas. Each one 

of the members would read a mystery novel up to a predetermined clue, and they would get 

together  on  Saturdays  to  unravel  the  enigma.  "I  didn't  miss  a  single  time,"  he  said.  "Of 

course, I was favored by my knowledge of the classics, which had revealed a logic of life 

capable of penetrating any mystery." He offered an enigma: a man registers at a hotel at ten 

at night,  goes  up to  his room, and the  next  morning the waiter who brings  him  his coffee 

finds  him dead and rotting in  his bed: The autopsy shows that  the  guest who arrived the 

night before has been dead for a week. 

The secretary sat up with a long creaking of joints. 

"That  means  that  when  he  got  to  the  hotel  he  had  already  been  dead  for  seven 

days," the secretary said. 

"The  story  was  written  twelve  years  ago,"  Judge  Arcadio  said,  ignoring  the 

interruption, "but the clue had been given by Heraclitus, five centuries before Christ." 

He  got  ready  to  reveal  it,  but  the  secretary  was  exasperated.  "Never,  since  the 

world  has  been  the  world,  has  anyone  found  out  who's  putting  up  the  lampoons,"  he 

proclaimed with tense aggressiveness. Judge Arcadio contemplated him with twisted eyes. 

"I bet you I'll discover him," he said. 

"I accept your bet." 

Rebeca Asيs was suffocating in the hot bedroom of the house opposite, her head 

sunk in the pillow, trying to sleep an impossible siesta. She had smoked leaves stuck to her 

temples. 

"Roberto," she said, addressing her husband, "if you don't open the window we're 

going to die of the heat." 

Roberto  Asيs  opened  the  window  at  the  moment  in  which  Judge  Arcadio  was 

leaving his office. 

 

"Try to sleep," he begged the exuberant woman who was lying with her arms open 

beneath the canopy of pink embroidery, completely naked under a light nylon nightgown. "I 

promise you I won't remember anything again." 

She let out a sigh. 

Roberto Asيs, who had spent  the night walking about the bedroom, lighting one 

cigarette  with  the  butt  of  another,  unable  to  sleep,  had  been  on  the  point  of  catching  the 

author of the lampoons that dawn. He'd heard the crackle of the paper in front of his house 

and the repeated rubbing of hands trying to smooth it on the wall. But he grasped it all too 

late  and  the  lampoon  had  been  posted.  When  he  opened  the  window  the  square  was 

deserted. 

From  that  moment  until  two  in  the  afternoon,  when  he  promised  his  wife  he 

wouldn't remember the lampoon again, she'd used every form of persuasion to try to calm 

him down. Finally she proposed a desperate formula: as the final proof of  her innocence, 

she offered to confess to Father ءngel aloud and in the presence of her  husband. The very 

offering of that humiliation had been sufficient. In spite of his confusion, he didn't dare take 

the next step and he had to give in. 

"It's always better to talk things out," she said without opening her eyes. "It would 

have been a disaster if you'd stayed with your belly all tight." 

He fastened the door as he went out. In the spacious shadowed house, completely 

shut  up,  he  perceived  the  hum  of  his  mother's  electric  fan,  as  she  slept  her  siesta  in  the 

house  next door. He poured  himself a  glass of lemonade  from  the refrigerator,  under the 

drowsy look of the black cook. 

From  her  cool  personal  surroundings  the  woman  asked  him  if  he  wanted  some 

lunch. He took the cover off the pot. A whole turtle was floating flippers up in the boiling 

water. For once he didn't shudder at the idea that the animal had been thrown alive into the 

pot, and that its heart would still be beating when they brought it quartered to the table. 

"I'm  not  hungry,"  he  said,  covering  the  pot.  And  he  added  from  the  door:  "The 

mistress won't have lunch either. She's had a headache all day." 

 

The two houses were connected by a porch with green paving stones from where 

one could see the wires of the henhouse at the back of the common courtyard. In the part of 

the porch that belonged to his mother's house there were several birdcages hanging from the 

eaves and several pots with intensely colored flowers. 

From  the  chaise  longue  where  she  had  just  taken  her  siesta,  his  eleven-year-old 

daughter  greeted  him  with  a  grumbling  greeting.  She  still  had  the  weave  of  the  linen 

marked on her cheek. 

"It's  going  on  three,"  he  pointed  out  in  a  very  low  voice.  And  he  added 

melancholically: "Try to keep track of things." 

"I dreamed about a glass cat," the child said. 

He couldn't repress a slight shudder. 

"What was it like?" 

"All glass," the girl said, trying to give form to the dream animal with her hands, 

"like a glass bird, but a cat." 

He  found  himself  lost,  in  full  sunlight,  in  a  strange  city.  "Forget  about  it,"  he 

murmured. "Something like that isn't worth the trouble." At that moment he saw his mother 

in the door of her bedroom and he felt rescued. 

"You're feeling better," he asserted. 

The widow Asيs returned a bitter expression.  "Every day  I'm  getting better and 

better so I can vote," she complained, making a bun of her abundant iron-colored hair. She 

went out onto the porch to change the water in the cages. 

Roberto  Asيs  dropped  onto  the  chaise  longue  where  his  daughter  had  been 

sleeping. The back of  his neck in  his hands,  he fallowed with  his withered eyes the bony 

woman in black who was conversing with  the birds in a low voice. They  fluttered in the 

fresh water, sprinkling the woman's face with their happy flapping. When she had finished 

with the cages, the widow Asيs wrapped her son in an aura of uncertainty. 

"You had things to do in the woods," she said. 

"I didn't go," he said. "I had some things to do here." 

 

"You won't go now till Monday." 

With  his  eyes,  he  agreed.  A  black  servant,  barefoot,  crossed  the  room  with  the 

child to take her to school. The widow Asيs remained on the porch until they left. Then she 

motioned  to  her  son  and  he  followed  her  into  the  broad  bedroom  where  the  fan  was 

humming.  She  dropped  into  a  broken-down  reed  rocker  beside  the  fan  with  an  air  of 

extreme weariness. On the whitewashed walls hung photographs of ancient children framed 

in copper. Roberto Asيs stretched out on the sumptuous, regal bed where, decrepit and in a 

bad  humor,  some  of  the  children  in  the  photographs,  including  his  own  father  last 

December, had died. 

"What's going on with you?" the widow asked. 

"Do you believe what people are saying?" he asked in turn. 

"At  my  age  you  have  to  believe  everything,"  the  widow  replied.  And  she  asked 

indolently: "What are they saying?" 

"That Rebeca Isabel isn't my child." 

The  widow  began  to  rock  slowly.  "She's  got  the  Asيs  nose,"  she  said.  After 

thinking a moment, she asked distractedly: "Who says so?" Roberto Asيs bit his nails. 

"They put up a lampoon." 

Only  then did the widow understand  that the dark shadows under  her son's eyes 

weren't the sediment of long sleeplessness. 

"Lampoons are not the people," she proclaimed. 

"But they only tell what people are already saying," said Roberto Asيs, "even if a 

person doesn't know." 

She, however, knew everything that the town had said about her family for many 

years.  In  a  house  like  hers,  full  of  servants,  godchildren,  and  wards  of  all  ages,  it  was 

impossible to lock oneself up in a bedroom without the rumors of the streets reaching even 

there. The turbulent Asيses, founders of the town when they were nothing but swineherds, 

seemed to have blood that was sweet for gossip. 

"Everything they say isn't true," she said, "even though a person might know." 

 

"Everybody  knows that Rosario Montero was going  to bed with Pastor," he said. 

"His last song was dedicated to her." 

"Everybody said so, but nobody knew for sure," the widow replied. "On the other 

hand,  now  it's  known  that  the  song  was  for  Margot  Ramيrez.  They  were  going  to  be 

married and only they and Pastor's mother knew it. It would have been better if they hadn't 

guarded so jealously the only secret that's ever been kept in this town." 

Roberto  Asيs  looked  at  his  mother  with  a  dramatic  liveliness.  "There  was  a 

moment this morning when I thought I was going to die," he said. The widow didn't seem 

moved. 

house." 

"The  Asيses  are  jealous,"  she  said.  "That's  been  the  great  misfortune  of  this 

They remained silent for a long time. It was almost four o'clock and the heat was 

beginning  to  subside.  When  Roberto  Asيs  turned  off  the  fan  the  whole  house  was 

awakening, full of female voices and bird flutes. 

"Pass me the bottle that's on the night table," the widow said. 

She  took  two pills, gray and round like two artificial pearls, and  gave the bottle 

back to her son, saying: "Take two; they'll help you sleep." He took them with the water his 

mother had left in the glass and rested his head on the pillow. 

The  widow  sighed.  She  maintained  a  pensive  silence.  Then,  as  always, 

generalizing about the whole town when  thinking of the  half-dozen  families that  made  up 

her class, she said: "The worst part about  this town is that the women  have to stay  home 

alone while the men go off into the woods." 

Roberto  Asيs  began  to  fall  asleep.  The  widow  observed  his  unshaven  chin,  the 

long nose made of angular cartilage, and thought about her dead husband. Adalberto Asيs, 

too,  had  known  despair.  He  was  a  giant  woodsman  who  had  worn  a  celluloid  collar  for 

fifteen minutes in his lifetime so they could take the daguerreotype that survived him on the 

night  table. It was said of  him  that in that same bedroom  he'd  murdered a  man  he  found 

sleeping  with  his  wife,  that  he'd  buried  him  secretly  in  the  courtyard.  The  truth  was 

 

different:  Adalberto  Asيs  had,  with  a  shotgun  blast,  killed  a  monkey  he'd  caught 

masturbating on the bedroom beam with his eyes fixed on his wife while she was changing 

her clothes. He'd died forty years later without having been able to rectify the legend. 

Father ءngel went up  the steep stairs with open steps. On the second  floor, at the 

end of a corridor with rifles and cartridge belts hanging on the wall, a policeman was lying 

on an army cot, reading face up. He was so absorbed in his reading that he didn't notice the 

presence of the priest until he greeted him. He rolled the magazine and sat up on the cot. 

"What are you reading?" Father ءngel asked. 

The policeman showed him the magazine. 

"Terry and the Pirates. " 

With  a  steady  look  the  priest  examined  the  three  cells  oi  reinforced  concrete, 

without windows, closed up on the corridor with thick iron bars. In the center cell another 

policeman  was  sleeping  in  his  shorts,  spread  out  in  a  hammock.  The  others  were  empty. 

Father ءngel asked about César Montero. 

"He's in there,"  the policeman said,  nodding  his head  toward a  closed door. "It's 

the commandant's room." 

"Can I talk to him?" 

"He's incommunicado," the policeman said. 

Father  ءngel  didn't  insist.  He  asked  if  the  prisoner  was all  right.  The  policeman 

answered that  he'd been  given the best room in  the barracks, with  good light and running 

water, but he'd gone twenty-four hours without eating. He'd refused the food the mayor had 

ordered from the hotel. 

"They should have brought him food from home," the priest said. 

"He doesn't want them to bother his wife." 

As  if  speaking  to  himself,  the  priest  murmured:  "I'll  talk  about  all  this  with  the 

mayor." He started to go on toward the end of the corridor, where the mayor had built his 

armored office. 

"He's not there," the policeman said. "He's been home two days with a toothache." 

 

Father ءngel visited him.  He was prostrate in a  hammock,  next to a chair where 

there  was  ajar  of  salt  water,  a  package  of  painkillers,  and  the  cartridge  belt  with  the 

revolver. His cheek was still swollen. Father ءngel brought a chair over to the hammock. 

"Have it pulled," he said. 

The mayor spat a mouthful of salt water into a basin. "That's easy to say," he said, 

his head still leaning over the basin. Father ءngel understood. He said in a very low voice: 

"If you'll authorize me, I'll talk to the dentist." He took a deep breath and ventured to add: 

"He's an understanding man." 

"Like a  mule,"  the  mayor said. "You'd have  to break  him down with bullets and 

then we'd be back where we started." 

Father ءngel followed him with  his eyes to the wash-stand. The  mayor turned on 

the  faucet,  put  his  swollen  cheek  under  the  flow  of  cool  water,  and  held  it  there  for  an 

instant, with an expression of ecstasy. Then  he chewed an analgesic tablet and took some 

water from the spigot, throwing it into his mouth with his hands. 

"Seriously," the priest insisted, "I can talk to the dentist." 

The mayor made a gesture of impatience. 

"Do whatever you want, Father." 

He  lay  face  up  in  the  hammock,  his  eyes  closed,  his  hands  behind  his  neck, 

breathing with a wrathful rhythm. The pain began to  give way. When  he opened his eyes 

again, Father ءngel was looking at him silently, sitting beside the hammock. 

"What brought you over here?" the mayor asked. 

"César Montero," the priest said without any preamble. "The man has to confess." 

"He's incommunicado," the mayor said. "Tomorrow, after the preliminary hearing, 

you can confess him. He's got to be sent off on Monday." 

"He's got forty-eight hours," the priest said. 

"And I've had this tooth for two weeks," said the mayor. 

In the dark room the mosquitoes were beginning to buzz. Father ءngel looked out 

the window and saw an intense pink cloud floating on the river. 

 

"What about the meal problem?" he asked. 

The  mayor left his hammock to close the balcony door. "I did my duty," he said. 

"He doesn't want to bother his wife or have food sent from  the hotel." He began  to spray 

insecticide around the room. Father ءngel looked in his pocket for a handkerchief so as not 

to sneeze, but instead of the handkerchief he found a wrinkled letter. "Agh," he exclaimed, 

trying to smooth out the letter with his fingers. The mayor interrupted his fumigation. The 

priest covered his nose, but it was a useless effort: he sneezed twice. "Sneeze, Father," the 

mayor said. And he emphasized with a smile: "We're living in a democracy." 

Father ءngel also smiled. Showing  the sealed envelope, he said: "I forgot  to  mail 

this  letter."  He  found  the  handkerchief  up  his  sleeve  and  blew  his  nose,  irritated  by  the 

insecticide. He was still thinking about César Montero. 

"It's as if you had him on bread and water," he said. 

"If that's what he wants," the mayor said, "we can't force him to eat." 

"What bothers me most is his conscience," the priest said. 

Without  taking  his  handkerchief  away  from  his  nose,  he  followed  the  mayor 

around the room with  his eyes until he finished fumigating. "He  must be very  upset if  he 

thinks he's going to be poisoned," he said. The mayor put the spray can on the floor. 

"He knows that everybody loved Pastor," he said. 

"César Montero too," the priest replied. 

"But it so happens that it's Pastor who's dead." 

The  priest  contemplated  the  letter.  The  light  was  becoming  hazy.  "Pastor,"  he 

murmured. "He didn't have time to confess." The mayor turned on the light before getting 

into the hammock. 

"I'll feel better  tomorrow,"  he said. "You can confess  him after the proceedings. 

Does that suit you?" 

Father  ءngel  agreed.  "It's  just  for  the  repose  of  his  conscience,"  he  repeated.  He 

stood  up  with  a  solemn  movement.  He  recommended  to  the  mayor  that  he  not  take  too 

many painkillers, and the mayor answered back reminding him not to forget the letter. 

 

"And something else, Father," the mayor said. "Try in any way you can to talk to 

the tooth-puller." He looked at the curate, who was beginning  to  go down the stairs, and 

added as before, smiling: "This all contributes to the consolidation of peace." 

Sitting by the door of his office, the postmaster watched the afternoon die. When 

Father  ءngel  gave  him  the  letter,  he  went  into  his  office,  moistened  with  his  tongue  a 

fifteen-centavo stamp, for airmail and the surcharge for construction. He kept on digging in 

his desk drawer. When the street lights went on, the priest put several coins on the counter 

and left without saying goodbye. 

The  postmaster  was  still  searching  in  the  drawer.  A  moment  later,  tired  of 

rummaging through papers, he wrote on the corner of the envelope in ink: No five-centavo 

stamps on hand. He signed underneath and put the stamp of the office there. 

That night, after rosary, Father ءngel found a dead mouse floating in the holy water 

font. Trinidad was setting the traps in the baptistery. The priest grabbed the animal by the 

tip of the tail. 

"You're going to cause trouble," he told Trinidad, waving the dead mouse in front 

of  her.  "Don't  you  know  thai  some  of  the  faithful  bottle  holy  water  to  give  their  sick  to 

drink?" 

"What's that got to do with it?" Trinidad asked. 

"Got  to do with it?" the priest answered. "Well, just  that  the sick people will be 

drinking holy water with arsenic in it." 

Trinidad reminded him that he still hadn't given her the money for the arsenic. "It's 

plaster," she said, and revealed the method: she had put plaster in the corners of the church, 

the mouse ate some and a moment later, desperately thirsty, it had gone to drink at the font. 

The water solidified the plaster in its stomach. 

"In any case," the priest said, "it would be better if you came and  got the  money 

for arsenic. I don't want any more dead mice in the holy water." 

In  the  study  a  delegation  of  Catholic  Dames  was  waiting  for  him,  headed  by 

Rebeca Asيs. After giving Trinidad the money for the arsenic, the priest commented on the 

 

heat  in  the  room  and  sat  down  at  the  desk  facing  the  three  Dames,  who  were waiting  in 

silence. 

"At your service, my distinguished ladies." 

They  looked  at  each  other.  Rebeca  Asيs  then  opened  a  fan  with  a  Japanese 

landscape painted on it, and said without mystery: "It's the matter of the lampoons, Father." 

With a sinuous voice, as if she were telling a fairy tale, she recounted the alarm of 

the  people.  She  said  that  even  though  Pastor's  death  could  be  interpreted  "as  something 

entirely personal," respectable families felt obliged to be concerned about the lampoons. 

Leaning  on  her  parasol,  Adalgisa  Montoya,  the  oldest  of  the  three,  was  more 

explicit: "We Catholic Dames have decided to intervene in the matter." 

Father ءngel reflected for a few seconds. Rebeca Asيs took a deep breath, and the 

priest  wondered  how  that  woman  could  exhale  such  a  hot  smell.  She  was  splendid  and 

floral,  possessing  a  dazzling  whiteness  and  passionate  health.  The  priest  spoke,  his  gaze 

fixed on an indefinite point. 

"My  feeling,"  he  said,  "is  that  we  shouldn't  pay  any  attention  to  the  voice  of 

scandal. We should place ourselves above such things and go on observing God's law as we 

have done up to now." 

Adalgisa Montoya approved with a  movement of  her  head.  But  the others didn't 

agree: it seemed to them that "this calamity can bring fatal consequences in the long run." 

At  that  moment  the  loudspeaker  at  the  movie  theater  coughed.  Father  ءngel  slapped  his 

forehead. "Excuse me," he said, while he searched in the drawer for the Catholic censorship 

list. 

"What are they showing?" 

"Pirates of Space, " said Rebeca Asيs. "It's a war picture." 

Father ءngel looked  for it in  the alphabetical listing,  muttering  fragmentary  titles 

while he ran his index finger over the long classified list. He stopped to turn the page. 

"Pirates of Space. " 

 

He was running his finger horizontally, looking for the moral classification, when 

he  heard  the  voice  of  the  manager  instead  of  the  expected  record,  announcing  the 

cancellation of the performance because of bad weather. One of the women explained that 

the manager had made that decision in view of the fact that the public demanded its money 

back if rain interrupted the movie before it was half over. 

"Too bad," Father ءngel said. "It was approved for all." 

He closed the notebook and continued: "As I was saying, this is an observant town. 

Nineteen years ago, when they assigned me to the parish, there were eleven cases of public 

concubinage among  the important families. Today there is only one left and I  hope for a 

short time only." 

"It's not for us," Rebeca Asيs said. "But these poor people..." 

"There's  no  cause  for  worry,"  the  priest  went  on,  indifferent  to  the  interruption. 

"One has to remember how much the town has changed. In those days a Russian ballerina 

gave a show for  men only in  the cockpit and at  the end she auctioned off everything she 

was wearing." 

Adalgisa Montoya interrupted him. 

"That's just the way it was," she said. 

Indeed, she remembered  the scandal as it  had been told  to  her: when  the dancer 

was  completely  naked,  an  old  man  began  to  shout  from  the  stands,  went  up  to  the  top 

bench, and urinated all over the audience. They'd told her that the rest of the men, following 

his example, had ended up urinating on each other in the midst of maddening shouts. 

"Now," the priest went on, "it's been proven that this is the most observant town in 

the whole apostolic prefecture." 

He  elaborated  his  thesis.  He  referred  to  some  difficult  instances  in  his  struggle 

against  the  debilities  and  weaknesses  of  the  human  species,  until  the  Catholic  Dames 

stopped paying attention, overwhelmed by the  heat. Rebeca Asيs unfolded her fan again, 

and  then  Father  ءngel  discovered  the  source  of  her  fragrance.  The  sandalwood  odor 

 

crystallized  in  the  drowsiness  of  the  room.  The  priest  drew  the  handkerchief  out  of  his 

sleeve and brought it to his nose so as not to sneeze. 

"At  the  same  time,"  he  continued,  "our  church  is  the  poorest  in  the  apostolic 

prefecture. The bells are cracked and the  naves are full of mice, because my life has been 

used up imposing moral standards and good habits." 

He  unbuttoned  his  collar.  "Any  young  man  can  do  the  rude  labor,"  he  said, 

standing  up.  "On  the  other  hand,  one  needs  the  tenacity  of  many  years  and  age-old 

experience to rebuild  morals." Rebeca Asيs raised her transparent  hand, with its wedding 

band topped by a ring with emeralds. 

"For that very reason," she said. "We thought that with __ these lampoons, all your 

work might be lost." 

The only woman who had remained silent until then took advantage of the pause 

to intervene. 

"Besides, we thought that the country is recuperating and that this present calamity 

might cause trouble." 

Father ءngel took a fan out of the closet and began to fan himself parsimoniously. 

"One  thing  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  other,"  he  said.  "We've  gone  through  a 

difficult political moment, but family morals have been maintained intact." 

He  stood  up  before  the  three  women.  "Within  a  few  years  I  shall  go  tell  the 

apostolic prefecture: I leave you that exemplary town. Now all that's needed is for you to 

send a young and active fellow to build the best church in the prefecture." 

He  gave  a  languid  bow  and  exclaimed:  "Then  I  will  go  to  die  in  peace  in  the 

courtyard of my ancestors." 

The  Dames protested. Adalgisa  Montoya expressed the  general thought: "This is 

like your own town, Father. And we want you to stay here until the last moment." 

"If it's a question of building a new church," Rebeca Asيs said, "we can start the 

campaign tomorrow." 

"All in good time," Father ءngel replied. 

 

Then, in a different tone,  he added: "As for now, I don't want to  grow old at the 

head of any parish. I don't want to happen to me what happened to meek Antonio Isabel del 

Santيsimo Sacramento del Altar Castaٌeda y Montero, who informed the bishop that a rain 

of dead birds was falling in his parish. The investigator sent by the bishop found him in the 

main square, playing cops and robbers with the children." 

The Dames expressed their perplexity. 

"Who was he?" 

"The  curate  who  succeeded  me  in  Macondo,"  Father  ءngel  said.  "He  was  one 

hundred years old." 

 

CHAPTER 3 

THE  WINTER,  whose  inclemency  had  been  foreseen  since  the  last  days  of  September, 

implanted its rigor that weekend. The mayor spent Sunday chewing analgesic tablets in his 

hammock while the river overflowed its banks and damaged the lower parts of town. 

During  the  first  letup  in  the  rain,  on  Monday  at  dawn,  the  town  needed  several 

hours to recover. The poolroom and  the barbershop opened early, but  most of  the  houses 

remained shut up until eleven o'clock. Mr. Carmichael was the first to have the opportunity 

to shudder at the spectacle of men carrying their houses to higher ground. Bustling groups 

had dug  up pilings and were transferring intact the  fragile habitations of wattle walls and 

palm roofs. 

Taking  refuge  under  the  eaves  of  the  barbershop,  his  umbrella  open,  Mr. 

Carmichael was contemplating  the laborious  maneuvers when the barber drew him out of 

his abstraction. 

"They should have waited for it to clear," the barber said. 

"It won't clear for two days," said Mr. Carmichael, and he shut his umbrella. "My 

corns tell me." 

The  men  carrying  the  houses,  sunk  in  the  mud  up  to  their  ankles,  passed  by, 

bumping  into  the  walls  of  the  barbershop.  Mr.  Carmichael  saw  the  tumble-down  insides 

through  the window, a bedroom completely despoiled of its intimacy, and  he felt invaded 

by a sense of disaster. 

It seemed like six in  the  morning, but  his stomach told  him  that it was going on 

twelve.  Moisés  the  Syrian  invited  him  to  sit  in  his  shop  until  the  rain  passed.  Mr. 

Carmichael reiterated his prediction that it wouldn't clear for the next forty-eight hours. He 

hesitated before leaping onto the boardwalk of the next building. A group of boys who were 

playing war threw a mud ball that splattered on the wall a few feet from his newly pressed 

pants. Elيas the Syrian came out of his shop with a broom in his hand, threatening the boys 

in an algebra of Arabic and Castilian. 

 

The boys leaped merrily. 

"Dumb Turk, go to work." 

Mr. Carmichael saw that his clothing was intact. Then he closed his umbrella and 

went into the barbershop, directly to the chair. 

"I always said that you were a prudent man," the barber said. 

He tied a towel around his neck. Mr. Carmichael breathed in the smell of lavender 

water, which produced the same  upset in  him as the  glacial vapors of the dentist's office. 

The  barber  began  by  trimming  the  curly  hair  on  the  back  of  his  neck.  Impatient,  Mr. 

Carmichael looked around for something to read. 

"Don't you have any newspapers?" 

The barber answered without pausing at his work. 

"The only newspapers left in the country are the official ones and they won't enter 

this establishment as long as I'm alive." 

Mr. Carmichael satisfied himself with contemplating  his  wing-tipped shoes  until 

the  barber  asked  about  the  widow  Montiel.  He'd  come  from  her  place.  He'd  been  the 

administrator of her affairs ever since the death of Don Chepe Montiel, whose bookkeeper 

he'd been for many years. 

"She's there," he said. 

"A person  goes on  killing  himself,"  the barber said as if talking  to  himself, "and 

there she is all alone with a piece of land you couldn't cross in five days on horseback. She 

must own some ten towns." 

"Three,"  Mr.  Carmichael  said.  And  he  added  with  conviction:  "She's  the  finest 

woman in all the world." 

The barber went over to  the counter to clean the comb.  Mr. Carmichael saw his 

goat face reflected in the mirror and once more understood why he didn't respect him. The 

barber spoke, looking at the image. 

"A  fine  business:  my  party  gets  in  power,  the  police  threaten  my  political 

opponents with death, and I buy up their land and livestock at a price I set myself." 

 

Mr. Carmichael lowered his head. The barber applied himself  to cutting  his  hair 

again.  "When  the  elections  are  over,"  he  concluded,  "I  own  three  towns,  I've  got  no 

competition, and along the way I've managed to get the upper hand even if the government 

changes. All I can say is: It's the best business there is; even better than counterfeiting." 

"José Montiel was rich long before the political troubles started," Mr. Carmichael 

said. 

"Sitting in his drawers by the door of a rice bin," the barber said. "The story goes 

that he put on his first pair of shoes at the age of nine." 

"And even if that were so," Mr. Carmichael admitted, "the widow had nothing to 

do with Montiel's business." 

"But she played the dummy," the barber said. 

Mr. Carmichael raised his head. He loosened the towel around his neck to let the 

circulation  through.  "That's  why  I've  always  preferred  that  my  wife  cut  my  hair,"  he 

protested. "She doesn't charge  me anything, and on  top of  that, she doesn't talk politics." 

The  barber  pushed  his  head  forward  and  continued  working  in  silence.  Sometimes  he 

clicked his scissors in the air to let off an excess of virtuosity. Mr. Carmichael heard shouts 

from the street. He looked in the mirror: children and women were passing by the door with 

the  furniture  and  utensils  from  the  houses  that  were  being  carried.  He  commented  with 

rancor:  "Misfortune  is  eating  at  us,  and  you  people  still with  your  political  hatreds.  The 

persecution's been over for a year and they still talk about the same thing." 

"The state of abandonment we're in is persecution too," the barber said. 

"But they don't beat us up," Mr. Carmichael said. 

"Abandoning us to God's mercy is another way of beating us up." 

Mr. Carmichael became exasperated. 

"That's newspaper talk," he said. 

The barber remained silent. He worked up some lather in a mug and anointed the 

back of Mr. Carmichael's neck with the brush. "It's just that a person is busting with talk," 

he apologized. "It isn't every day that we get an impartial man." 

 

"No  man can  help being impartial with eleven children to  feed," Mr. Carmichael 

said. 

"Agreed," said the barber. 

He  made  the razor sing on the palm of  his  hand. He shaved  the  neck in silence, 

cleaning off the soap on  his fingers and  then cleaning  his fingers on  his pants. Finally  he 

rubbed a piece of alum on the back of the neck. He finished in silence. 

While he was buttoning up his collar, Mr. Carmichael saw the notice nailed to the 

back wall: Talking Politics Prohibited. He brushed  the pieces of  hair from  his shoulders, 

hung  his umbrella over his arm, and pointing to  the notice, asked: "Why don't  you take it 

down?" 

"It  doesn't  apply  to  you,"  the  barber  said.  "We've  already  agreed  that  you're  an 

impartial man." 

Mr.  Carmichael  didn't  hesitate  that  time  to  leap  onto  the  boardwalk.  The  barber 

watched  him  until  he  turned  the  corner,  and  then  he  grew  ecstatic  over  the  roiled  and 

threatening river. It had stopped raining, but a heavy cloud hung motionless over the town. 

A  short  time  before  one  o'clock  Moisés  the  Syrian  came  in,  lamenting  that  the  hair  was 

falling out of his skull and yet, on the other hand, it was growing on the back of his neck 

with extraordinary rapidity. 

The  Syrian  had  his  hair  cut  every  Monday.  Ordinarily  he  would  lower  his  head 

with a kind of fatalism and snore in Arabic while the barber talked to himself out loud. That 

Monday, however, he awoke with a start at the first question. 

"Do you know who was just here?" 

"Carmichael," the Syrian said. 

"Rotten old black Carmichael," the barber confirmed as if he  had spelled out the 

phrase. "I detest that kind of man." 

"Carmichael isn't a man," Moisés the Syrian said. "He hasn't bought a pair of shoes 

in more than three years. But in politics he does what has to be done: he keeps books with 

his eyes closed." 

 

He settled his beard on his chin to snore again, but the barber planted  himself in 

front of him with his arms folded, saying: "Tell me one thing, you shitty Turk: When all's 

said and done, whose side are you on?" The Syrian answered, unflustered: "Mine." 

"You're wrong," the barber said. "You ought to at least keep in mind the four ribs 

they broke on your fellow countryman Elيas's son on orders from Don Chepe Montiel." 

"Elيas is all upset that his son turned out to be a politician," the Syrian said. "But 

now the boy's having a grand time dancing in Brazil and Chepe Montiel is dead." 

Before leaving the room which was in disorder from his long nights of suffering, 

the mayor shaved the right side of his face, leaving the other side with its week-old beard. 

Then he put on a clean uniform, his patent leather boots, and went down to eat in the hotel, 

taking advantage of the pause in the rain. 

There was no one in the dining room. The mayor made his way through the small 

tables for four and occupied the most discreet spot in the back of the room. 

"Masks," he called. 

He  was  answered  by  a  very  young  girl  with  a  short  tight  dress  and  breasts  like 

stones. The mayor ordered lunch without looking at her. On her way back to the kitchen the 

girl turned on the radio placed on a shelf at the end of the dining room. A  news bulletin 

came  on,  with  quotations  from  a  speech  given  the  night  before  by  the  president  of  the 

republic, and then a list of new items prohibited for import. The heat grew more intense as 

the announcer's voice filled the space. When the girl returned with the soup, the mayor was 

trying to check the heat by fanning himself with his cap. 

"The radio makes me sweat too," the girl said. 

The  mayor began to drink  his soup.  He'd always thought  that that solitary  hotel, 

sustained by occasional traveling salesmen, was a different place from the rest of the town. 

Actually, it antedated the town. On its run-down wooden balcony, merchants who 

carne from  the interior to buy the rice harvest  used  to spend the  night playing cards and 

waiting for the coolness of dawn in order to be able to sleep. Colonel Aureliano Buendيa 

 

himself, on his way to Macondo to draw up the terms of surrender in the last civil war, had 

slept  on  that  balcony  one  night  during  a  time  when  there  weren't  any  towns  for  many 

leagues around. It was the same building then, with wooden walls and a zinc roof, with the 

same dining room and the same cardboard partitions, except with no electricity or sanitary 

services. An old  traveling salesman recounted  that  until the  turn of the century there  had 

been a collection of masks hanging in the dining room at the disposal of the customers, and 

that the masked guests took care of their needs in the courtyard in full view of everyone. 

The  mayor had  to  unbutton  his collar in order to finish the soup.  After the  news 

bulletin there was a record with rhyming commercials. Then a sentimental bolero. A man 

with a mentholated voice, dying with love, has decided to travel around the world in pursuit 

of a woman. The  mayor gave his attention  to the room while he waited for the rest of his 

meal;  he  even  saw  two  children  with  two  chairs  and  a  rocker  pass  in  front  of  the  hotel. 

Behind came two women and a man with pots and tubs and the rest of the furniture. 

He went to the door, shouting: "Where did you steal that junk?" 

The women stopped. The  man explained  to  him  that  they were transferring  their 

house to higher ground. The mayor asked where they'd taken it and the man pointed toward 

the south with his hat: "Up there, to a lot that Don Sabas rented us for thirty pesos." 

The  mayor  examined  the  furniture.  A  rocker  that  was  falling  apart  at  the  joints, 

broken pots: poor people's things. He reflected for an instant. Finally he said: "Take those 

houses and all your goods to the vacant lot beside the cemetery." 

The man became confused. 

"It's  town  land  and  it  won't  cost  you  anything,"  the  mayor  said.  "The  town 

government gives it to you." 

Then,  turning  to  the  women,  he  added:  "And  tell  Don  Sabas  that  I  send  him  a 

message not to be a highway robber." 

 

He  finished  his  lunch  without  tasting  the  food.  Then  he  lighted  a  cigarette.  He 

lighted another with the butt and was thoughtful for a long time, resting his elbows on the 

table while the radio ground out sentimental boleros. 

"What are you thinking about?" the girl asked, clearing away the empty plates. 

The mayor didn't blink. 

"Those poor people." 

He put on  his cap and crossed the room. Turning around from  the door, he said: 

"We've got to make this town a decent sort of mess." 

A bloody dogfight interrupted his passage as he turned the corner. He saw a knot 

of  backs  and  legs  in  a  whirlwind  of  howls  and  then  bared  teeth  and  one  dog  dragging  a 

limb, its tail between its legs. The mayor stepped to one side and went along the boardwalk 

toward the police barracks. 

A woman was shouting in the lockup, while the guard was sleeping his siesta lying 

face down on a cot. The mayor kicked the leg of the cot. The guard awoke with a leap. 

"Who's she?" the mayor asked. 

The guard came to attention. 

"The woman who was putting up the lampoons." 

The mayor broke out in curses against his subordinates. He wanted to know who'd 

brought  the  woman  there  and  under  whose  orders  they'd  put  her  in  the  lockup.  The 

policemen gave an extravagant explanation. 

"When did you lock her up?" 

They had jailed her Saturday night. 

"Well, she comes out and one of  you  goes in," the  mayor shouted. "That woman 

was asleep in the lockup and the whole town woke up papered." 

As  soon  as  the  heavy  iron  door  was  opened,  a  mature  woman  with  pronounced 

bones and a bumptious bun held in place by a comb came shouting out of the cell. 

"You can go to hell," she said to the mayor. 

 

The  woman  loosened  the  bun,  shook  her  long,  abundant  hair  several  times,  and 

went down the stairs like a stampede, shouting: "Whore, whore." The  mayor leaned over 

the railing and shouted with all the power of  his voice, as  if not only  the woman and  his 

men  but  the  whole  town  were  meant  to  hear  him:  "And  stop  fucking  me  up  with  those 

damned papers." 

Although the drizzle persisted, Father ءngel went out to take his afternoon walk. It 

was still early for his appointment with the mayor, so he went to the flooded part of town. 

All he found was the corpse of a cat floating among the flowers. 

While he was coming back, the afternoon began to dry out. It was getting intense 

and  bright.  A  barge  covered  with  tar  paper  was  coming  down  the  thick  and  motionless 

river. From a half-collapsed house a child ran out, shouting that he'd found the sea inside a 

shell. Father ءngel put the shell to his ear. Indeed, there was the sea. 

Judge  Arcadio's wife was  sitting  by  the  door  of  their  house  as  if  in  ecstasy,  her 

arms  folded over her stomach and  her eyes  fixed on  the barge.  Three houses beyond, the 

shops  began,  the  showcases  with  their  trinkets  and  the  impassive  Syrians  sitting  in  the 

doorways. The afternoon was dying with intense pink clouds and  the uproar of parrots and 

monkeys on the opposite shore. 

The houses began to open up. Under the dirty almond trees on the square, around 

the  refreshment  carts,  or  on  the  worn  granite  benches  in  the  flower  beds,  the  men  were 

gathering to chat. Father  ءngel thought that every afternoon at  that instant  the town went 

through the miracle of transfiguration. 

"Father, do you remember the concentration camp prisoners?" 

Father  ءngel  didn't  see  Dr.  Giraldo,  but  he  pictured  him  smiling  behind  the 

screened window. In all honesty he didn't remember the photographs, but he was sure he'd 

seen them at one time or another. 

"Go into the waiting room," the doctor said. 

Father ءngel pushed open the screen door. Stretched out on a mattress was a child 

of  indefinite  sex,  nothing  but  bones,  covered  all  over  by  yellowed  skin.  Two  men  and  a 

 

woman  were  waiting,  sitting  by  the  partition.  The  priest  didn't  smell  any  odor,  but  he 

thought that that creature should have been giving off an intense stench. 

"Who is it?" he asked. 

"My son," the woman answered. And she added, as if excusing  herself, "For two 

years he's been shitting a little blood." 

The  patient  made  his  eyes  turn  toward  the  door  without  moving  his  head.  The 

priest felt a terrified pity. 

"And what have you done for him?" he asked. 

"We've been giving him green bananas for a long time," the woman said, "but he 

hasn't wanted to take them, even though they're nice and binding." 

"You have to bring him to confession," the priest said. 

But  he said it without conviction. He closed the door carefully and scratched on 

the window screen with a fingernail, putting his face close in order to see the doctor inside. 

Dr. Giraldo was grinding something in a mortar. 

"What's he got?" the priest asked. 

"I  still  haven't  examined  him,"  the  doctor  answered.  And  he  commented 

thoughtfully, "There are things that happen to people by God's will, Father." 

Father ءngel let the comment pass. 

"None of the dead people I've seen in my life seemed as dead as that poor boy," he 

said. 

He took his leave. There were no vessels at the dock. It was beginning to get dark. 

Father ءngel understood that  his state of  mind  had changed with the sight of the sick boy. 

Realizing that he was late for his appointment, he walked faster toward the police barracks. 

The mayor was collapsed in a folding chair with his head in his hands. 

"Good evening," the priest said slowly. 

The  mayor  raised  his  head  and  the  priest  shuddered  at  the  eyes  reddened  by 

desperation. He had one cheek cool and newly shaved, but the other was a swampy tangle 

 

of an unguent the color of ashes. He exclaimed in a dull moan: "Father, I'm going to shoot 

myself." 

Father ءngel felt a certain consternation. 

"You're getting drunk from so many aspirins," he said. 

The  mayor  shuffled  over  to  the  wall,  and  clutching  his  head  in  both  hands,  he 

pounded it violently against the boards. The priest had never witnessed such pain. 

"Take  two  more  pills,"  he  said,  consciously  proposing  a  remedy  for  his  own 

confusion. "Two more won't kill you." 

Not only was that really true, but he was fully aware that he was awkward facing 

human pain. He looked  for the analgesics in the  naked space of the room.  Up against the 

walls there were half a dozen leather stools, a glass cabinet stuffed with dusty papers, and a 

lithograph  of  the  president  of  the  republic  hanging  from  a  nail.  The  only  trace  of  the 

analgesics was the cellophane wrappings strewn on the floor. 

"Where are they?" he said desperately. 

"They don't have any more effect on me," the mayor said. 

The curate went over to him, repeating: "Tell me where they are." The mayor gave 

a violent twitch and Father ءngel saw an enormous and  monstrous face a few inches from 

his eyes. 

"God damn it," the mayor shouted. "I already said they don't do me a fucking bit of 

good." 

He lifted a stool above his head and flung it with all the might of his desperation 

against  the  glass  case.  Father  ءngel  only  understood  what  had  happened  after  the 

instantaneous drizzle of glass, when the mayor began to rise up like a serene apparition in 

the midst of the cloud of dust. At that moment there was a perfect silence. 

"Lieutenant," the priest murmured. 

In  the  door  to  the  porch  stood  the  policemen  with  their  rifles  at  the  ready.  The 

mayor  looked  at  them  without  seeing  them,  breathing  like  a  cat,  and  they  lowered  their 

 

rifles but remained motionless beside the door. Father ءngel led the mayor by the arm to the 

folding chair. 

"Where are the analgesics?" he insisted. 

The  mayor closed his eyes and threw his head back. "I'm not taking any  more of 

that junk,"  he said. "My ears are buzzing and the bones of  my skull are going  to sleep on 

me." During a brief respite in the pain, he turned his head to the priest and asked: "Did you 

talk to the tooth-puller?" 

The priest said yes silently. From the expression that followed that reply the mayor 

learned the results of the interview. 

"Why don't you talk to Dr. Giraldo?" the priest proposed. "There are doctors who 

pull teeth." 

The  mayor delayed in answering. "He'll probably say  he  hasn't  got any  forceps," 

he said. And he added: "It's a plot." 

He took advantage of the respite to rest from that implacable afternoon. When he 

opened  his  eyes  the  room  was  in  shadows.  He  said,  without  seeing  Father  Angel:  "You 

came about César Montero." 

He didn't hear any answer. "With this pain I haven't been able to do anything," he 

went on. He got up to turn on the light and the first wave of mosquitoes came in through the 

balcony. Father ءngel was surprised at the hour. 

"Time is passing," he said. 

"He  has  to  be  sent  off  on  Wednesday  in  any  case,"  the  mayor  said.  "Tomorrow 

arrange what has to be arranged and confess him in the afternoon." 

"What time?" 

"Four o'clock." 

"Even if it's raining?" 

In a single look, the mayor liberated all the impatience repressed during two weeks 

of suffering. 

"Even if the world is coming to an end, Father." 

 

The  pain  had  become  invulnerable  to  the  analgesics.  The  mayor  hung  the 

hammock on the balcony of his room, trying to sleep in the coolness of early evening. But 

before  eight  o'clock  he  succumbed  again  to  desperation  and  went  down  into  the  square, 

which was in a lethargy from a dense wave of heat. 

After  roaming  about  the  area  without  finding  the  inspiration  he  needed  to  rise 

above the pain, he went into the movie theater. It was a mistake. The buzz of the warplanes 

increased  the  intensity  of  the  pain.  He  left  the  theater  before  intermission  and  got  to  the 

pharmacy just as Don Lalo Moscote was getting ready to close the doors. 

"Give me the strongest thing you've got for a toothache." 

The druggist examined the cheek with a look of stupor. Then he went to the rear of 

the establishment, past a double row of cabinets with  glass doors which were completely 

filled  with  porcelain  vials,  each  with  the  name  of  a  product  written  in  blue  letters.  On 

looking at  him  from behind,  the  mayor  understood  that  that  man with a chubby and pink 

neck might be living an instant of happiness. He knew him. He was installed in two rooms 

behind the store and his wife, a very fat woman, had been paralyzed for many years. 

Don Lalo Moscote came back to the counter with a vial that had no label, which, 

on being opened, exhaled a vapor of sweet herbs. 

"What's that?" 

The druggist sank  his  fingers into the dried seeds in  the  vial. "Pepper cress," he 

said. "Chew it well and swallow the juice slowly: there's nothing better for rheumatism." He 

threw  several  seeds  into  the  palm  of  his  hand  and  said,  looking  at  the  mayor  over  his 

glasses: "Open your mouth." 

The  mayor drew back.  He turned  the vial around  to  make sure  that  nothing was 

written on it, and returned his look to the pharmacist. 

"Give me something foreign," he said. 

"This is better than anything foreign," Don Lalo Moscote said. "It's guaranteed by 

three thousand years of popular wisdom." 

 

He began  to wrap  up  the seeds in a piece of  newspaper. He didn't look like the 

head of a family. He looked like a  maternal uncle, wrapping up  the pepper cress with the 

loving care one devotes to making little paper birds for children. When  he raised his head 

he'd begun to smile. 

"Why don't you have it pulled?" 

The  mayor  didn't  answer.  He  paid  with  a  bill  and  left  the  pharmacy  without 

waiting for his change. 

Past  midnight  he  was  still  twisting  in  his  hammock  without  daring  to  chew  the 

seeds. Around eleven o'clock, at the high point of the heat, a cloudburst had fallen that had 

broken up into a light drizzle. Worn out by the fever, trembling in a sticky and icy sweat, 

the mayor, lying face down in the hammock, opened his mouth and began to pray mentally. 

He  prayed  deeply,  his  muscles  tense  in  the  final  spasm,  but  aware  that  the  more  he 

struggled to  make contact with God, the  greater the  force of  the pain to push  him in the 

opposite direction. Then he put on his boots, and his raincoat over his pajamas, and went to 

the police barracks. 

He  burst  in  shouting.  Tangled  in  a  mangrove  of  reality  and  nightmare,  the 

policemen stumbled in  the  hallway, looking for  their weapons in the darkness. When the 

lights went on they were half dressed, awaiting orders. 

"Gonzلlez, Rovira, Peralta," the mayor shouted. 

The three  named separated from  the  group and surrounded  the lieutenant.  There 

was no visible reason to justify the selection: they were three ordinary half-breeds. One of 

them, with infantile features, shaven head, was wearing a flannel undershirt. The other two 

were wearing the same undershirt under unbuttoned tunics. 

They  didn't  receive  precise  orders.  Leaping  down  the  stairs  four  steps  at  a  time 

behind  the  mayor,  they  left  the  barracks  in  Indian  file.  They  crossed  the  street  without 

worrying  about  the  drizzle  and  stopped  in  front  of  the  dentist's  office.  With  two  quick 

charges  they  battered  down  the  door  with  their  rifle  butts.  They  were  already  inside  the 

house  when  the  lights  in  the  vestibule  went  on.  A  small  bald  man  with  veins  showing 

 

through his skin appeared in his shorts at the rear door, trying to put on his bathrobe. At the 

first instant he remained paralyzed with one arm up and his mouth open, as in the flash of a 

photograph. Then he gave a leap backward and bumped into his wife, who was coming out 

of the bedroom in her nightgown. 

"Don't move," the lieutenant shouted. 

The  woman  said:  "Oh!"  with  her  hands  over  her  mouth,  and  went  back  to  the 

bedroom. The dentist went  toward the vestibule, tying  the cord on  his bathrobe, and only 

then  did  he  make  out  the  three  policemen  who  were  pointing  their  rifles  at  him,  and  the 

mayor,  water  dripping  from  all  over  his  body,  tranquil,  his  hands  in  the  pockets  of  his 

raincoat. 

"If the lady leaves her room they have orders to shoot her," the lieutenant said. 

The dentist  grasped the doorknob, saying  to the inside: "You  heard, girl," and he 

meticulously closed the bedroom door. Then he walked to the dental office, observed past 

the  faded  wicker  furniture  by  the  smoky  eyes  of  the  rifle  barrels.  Two  policemen  went 

ahead of him to the door of the office. One turned on the light; the other went directly to the 

worktable and took a revolver out of the drawer. 

"There must be another," the mayor said. 

He  had  entered  last,  behind  the  dentist.  The  two  policemen  made  a  quick  and 

conscientious  search  while  the  third  guarded  the  door.  They  dumped  the  instrument  box 

onto  the  worktable,  scattered  plaster  molds,  unfinished  false  teeth,  loose  teeth,  and  gold 

caps on  the  floor. They emptied  the porcelain vials that were in the cabinet and,  making 

quick  stabs  with  their  bayonets,  gutted  the  oilcloth  cushion  on  the  dentist's  chair  and  the 

spring cushion on the revolving chair. 

"It's a long-barreled thirty-eight," the mayor specified. 

He scrutinized the dentist. "It would be better if you said outright where it is," he 

told him. "We didn't come prepared to tear the house apart." Behind his gold-framed glasses 

the dentist's dull and narrow eyes revealed nothing. 

 

"There's no hurry on my part," he replied in a relaxed way. "If you feel like it, you 

can go right on tearing it apart." 

The mayor reflected. After once more examining the small room made of unplaned 

planks, he went over to the chair, giving sharp commands to his men. He stationed one by 

the street door, another at the entrance to the office, and the third by the window. When he 

was settled in the chair, only  then  unbuttoning  his soaked raincoat,  he  felt surrounded by 

cold steel. He breathed in deeply of the air, rarefied by creosote, and rested his skull against 

the headrest, trying to control his breathing. The dentist picked some instruments up off the 

floor and put them in a pot to boil. 

He  remained  with  his  back  to  the  mayor,  contemplating  the  blue  flame  of  the 

alcohol  lamp  with  the  same  expression  that  he  must  have  had  when  he  was  alone  in  the 

office. When  the water was boiling,  he wrapped the  handle of  the pot in a piece of paper 

and carried it over to the chair. His way was blocked by a policeman. The dentist lowered 

the pot, to look at the mayor over the steam, and said: "Order this assassin to go someplace 

where he won't be in the way." 

On a signal from the mayor, the policeman moved away from the window in order 

to give free access to the chair. He pulled a chair against the wall and sat down with his legs 

apart, the rifle across his thighs, without relaxing  his vigilance. The dentist  turned on the 

lamp. Dazzled by the sudden light,  the  mayor closed his eyes and opened  his  mouth. The 

pain had stopped. 

The  dentist  located  the  sick  molar,  using  his  index  finger  to  push  aside  the 

inflamed cheek and adjusting the movable lamp with the other hand, completely insensible 

to the patient's anxious breathing. Then he rolled his sleeve up to the elbow and got ready to 

pull the tooth. 

The mayor grabbed him by the wrist. 

"Anesthesia," he said. 

Their eyes met for the first time. 

"You people kill without anesthesia," the dentist said softly. 

 

The  mayor didn't  notice any effort  to free itself in  the  hand  that was holding the 

forceps. "Bring the vials,"  he said. The policeman stationed in the corner  moved  his rifle 

barrel in their direction and they both heard the sound of the rifle as it was cocked from the 

chair. 

"Suppose there isn't any," the dentist said. 

The mayor let go of his wrist. "There has to be," he replied, examining the things 

scattered on the floor with disconsolate interest. The dentist watched him with sympathetic 

attention. Then he pushed him back against the headrest and, showing signs of impatience 

for the first time, said: "Don't be a fool, Lieutenant. With an abscess like that, no anesthesia 

will be any good." 

Later, having suffered the most terrible moment of his life, the mayor relaxed the 

tension of his muscles, and remained in the chair exhausted as the dark designs painted by 

the dampness on the cardboard ceiling fastened themselves in his memory, to remain until 

the  day  he  died.  He  heard  the  dentist  busying  himself  at  the  washstand.  He  heard  him 

putting the desk drawers in order and picking up some of the objects from the floor. 

"Rovira," the  mayor called. "Tell Gonzalez  to come in and  you two pick  up the 

things off the floor until the place is the way you found it." 

The policemen did so. The dentist picked up some cotton with his pincers, soaked 

it in an iron-colored liquid, and covered the hole. The mayor had a feeling of burning on the 

surface. After the dentist had closed his  mouth he continued with  his gaze on  the ceiling, 

hanging  on  the  sound  of  the  policemen  as  they  tried  to  reconstruct  from  memory  the 

meticulous  order  of  the  office.  It  struck  two  in  the  belfry.  A  curlew,  a  minute  behind, 

repeated  the  hour  in  the  murmur  of  the  drizzle.  A  moment  later,  knowing  that  they  had 

finished, the mayor gave a sign indicating that his men should return to the barracks. 

The dentist had remained beside the chair all the while. When the policemen had 

left, he took the cotton out of the gum. Then he explored the inside of the mouth with the 

lamp, adjusted the jaws again, and took the light away. Everything was over. In the hot little 

 

room  all  that  remained  then  was  that  strange  uneasiness  known  to  sweepers  in  a  theater 

after the last actor has left. 

"Ingrate," the mayor said. 

The dentist put his hands in the pockets of his robe and took a step backward to let 

him  pass.  "There  were  orders  to  level  the  house,"  the  mayor  went  on,  searching  for  him 

with  his eyes behind the circle of light. "There were precise instructions to find weapons 

and ammunition and documents with the details of a nationwide conspiracy." He fixed his 

still  damp  eyes  on  the  dentist  and  added:  "I  thought  that  I  was  doing  the  right  thing  by 

disobeying  that  order,  but  I  was  wrong.  Things  have  changed  now.  The  opposition  has 

guarantees and everybody is living in peace, and still you go on thinking like a conspirator." 

The dentist dried the cushion of the chair with his sleeve and turned it over to the side that 

hadn't been ruined. 

"Your attitude is harmful to the town," the mayor went on, pointing to the cushion, 

without paying any attention to the thoughtful look the dentist was giving his cheek. "Now 

it's up to the town government to pay for all this mess, and the street door besides. A whole 

lot of money, all because of your stubbornness." 

"Rinse your mouth out with fenugreek water," the dentist said. 

 

CHAPTER 4 

JUDGE ARCADIO consulted the dictionary at the telegraph office because his was missing 

a few letters. It didn't solve anything as he looked up pasquيn, the word for lampoon: name 

of  a  shoemaker  in  Rome  famous  for  the  satires  he  wrote  against  everybody  and  other 

unimportant facts. By the same  historic token, he thought, an anonymous insult placed on 

the door of a house could just as well be called a marforio. He wasn't entirely disappointed. 

During the two minutes he had spent in that consultation, for the first time in many years he 

had felt the comfort of a duty fulfilled. 

The telegrapher saw him put the dictionary back on the shelf among the forgotten 

compilations of ordinances and decrees concerning the postal and telegraphic service, and 

cut off the transmission of a message with an energetic signal. Then he came over, shuffling 

the cards, ready to repeat the latest popular trick: guessing the three cards. 

But Judge Arcadio paid no attention to him. "I'm very busy now," he apologized, 

and  went  out  into  the  roasting  street,  pursued  by  the  confused  certainty  that  it  was  only 

eleven o'clock and that Tuesday still had a lot of hours left for him to use up. 

In his office the mayor was waiting for him with a moral problem. As a result of 

the last elections, the police had confiscated and destroyed the electoral documents of the 

opposition  party.  The  majority  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  town  now  lacked  any  means  of 

identification. 

"Those  people  moving  their  houses,"  the  mayor  concluded  with  his  arms  open, 

"don't even know what their names are." 

Judge  Arcadio  could  understand  that  there  was  a  sincere  affliction  behind  those 

open  arms.  But  the  mayor's  problem  was  simple:  all  he  had  to  do  was  ask  for  the 

appointment  of  a  civil  registrar.  The  secretary  simplified  the  solution  even  further:  "All 

that's necessary is to send for him," he said. "He was already appointed over a year ago." 

The  mayor  remembered.  Months  before,  when  they  communicated  to  him  the 

appointment of a civil registrar, he'd made a long-distance phone call to ask how he should 

 

receive him, and they'd answered: "With bullets." Now the orders that came were different. 

He turned to the secretary with his hands in his pockets, and told him: "Write the letter." 

The clack of  the typewriter produced a dynamic atmosphere  in  the office, which 

echoed  in  Judge  Arcadio's  consciousness.  He  found  himself  empty.  He  took  a  crumpled 

cigarette out of his shirt pocket and rolled it between the palms of his hands before lighting 

it. Then he threw his chair back to the limit of its springs and in that posture he was startled 

by the definite certainty that he was living out a minute of his life. 

He put the phrase together before he said it: "If I were in your place, I would also 

appoint a deputy of the public ministry." 

Contrary to what he had hoped, the mayor didn't answer right away. He looked at 

his watch, but didn't see the  time. He settled on  the evidence  that it was still a long  time 

until  lunch.  When  he  spoke,  he  did  so  without  enthusiasm:  he  wasn't  familiar  with  the 

procedure for appointing a deputy of the public ministry. 

"The  deputy  used  to  be  named  by  the  town  council,"  Judge  Arcadio  explained. 

"Since  there's  no  council  now,  the  government  by  state  of  siege  authorizes  you  to  name 

one." 

The mayor listened, while he signed the letter without reading it. Then he made an 

enthusiastic  comment,  but  the  secretary  had  an  observation  of  an  ethical  nature  to  make 

concerning the procedure recommended by his superior. Judge Arcadio insisted: it was an 

emergency procedure under an emergency regime. 

"I like the sound of it," the mayor said. 

He  took  off  his  cap  to  fan  himself  and  Judge  Arcadio  noticed  the  circular  mark 

printed on  his forehead. From  the way in which he was fanning himself,  he knew that the 

mayor hadn't finished thinking. He knocked the ash off his cigarette with the long, curved 

nail of his pinky and waited. 

"Can you think of a candidate?" the mayor asked. 

It was obvious that he was addressing the secretary. 

"A candidate," the judge repeated, closing his eyes. 

 

"If I were in your place, I'd name an honest man," the secretary said. 

The  judge  caught  the  impertinence.  "That's  more  than  obvious,"  he  said,  and 

looked alternately at the two men. 

"For example," the mayor said. 

"I can't think of anyone right now," said the judge, thoughtful. 

The  mayor went  to the door. "Think about it,"  he said. "When  we get out of the 

mess of the floods we'll take up the mess of the deputy." The secretary sat hanging over his 

typewriter until he no longer heard the mayor's heels. 

"He's  crazy,"  he  said  then.  "A  year  and  a  half  ago  they  busted  the  head  of  the 

deputy with rifle butts and now he's looking for a candidate to give the job to." 

Judge Arcadio leaped to his feet. 

"I'm  leaving,"  he  said.  "I  don't  want  you  to  spoil  my  lunch  with  your  horror 

stories." 

He went out of  the office. There was an ominous element in the composition of 

noontime. The secretary, with his sensitivity to superstition, noticed it. When he put on the 

padlock he felt that he was performing a forbidden act. He fled. At the door of the telegraph 

office he caught up with Judge Arcadio, who was interested in seeing if the card trick was 

in any way applicable to a game of poker. The telegrapher refused to reveal the secret. He 

limited himself to repeating the trick indefinitely in order to give Judge Arcadio a chance to 

discover  the  clue.  The  secretary  also  observed  the  maneuver.  Finally  he  reached  a 

conclusion. Judge Arcadio, on the other hand, didn't even look at the three cards. He knew 

that  they  were  the  same  ones  he'd  picked  at  random  and  that  the  telegrapher  was  giving 

them back to him without having seen them. 

"It's a matter of magic," the telegrapher said. 

Judge Arcadio was only thinking then of the chore of crossing the street. When he 

resigned himself  to walking, he  grabbed the secretary by the arm and obliged  him to dive 

with him into the melted-glass atmosphere. They emerged onto the shaded sidewalk. Then 

 

the secretary explained to him the key to the trick. It was so simple that Judge Arcadio felt 

offended. 

They walked in silence for a spell. 

"Naturally," the judge said suddenly with a gratuitous rancor, "you didn't check the 

information out." 

The secretary hesitated for an instant, searching for the meaning of the sentence. 

"It's  very  hard,"  he  finally  said.  "Most  of  the  lampoons  are  torn  down  before 

dawn." 

"That's another trick  I don't  understand," Judge  Arcadio said. "I'd never lose any 

sleep over a lampoon that nobody's read." 

"That's just it," the secretary said, stopping because he'd reached his house. "It isn't 

the lampoons that won't let people sleep; it's fear of the lampoons." 

In spite of its being incomplete, Judge Arcadio wanted to know what information 

the secretary had gathered. He enumerated the cases, with names and dates: eleven in seven 

days. There was no connection among the eleven  names. Those  who'd seen  the lampoons 

agreed that they'd been written with a brush in blue ink and in printed letters, with capitals 

and  small  letters  mixed  up  as  if  written  by  a  child.  The  spelling  was  so  absurd  that  the 

mistakes looked deliberate. They revealed no secrets: there was nothing said in  them  that 

hadn't been in the public domain  for some time. He'd  made all the conjectures that were 

possible when Moisés the Syrian called to him from his shop. 

"Have you got a peso?" 

Judge Arcadio didn't understand. But he turned his pockets inside out: twenty-five 

centavos and an American coin that he'd kept as a good luck charm ever since his university 

days. Moisés the Syrian took the twenty-five centavos. 

"Take whatever you want and pay  me whenever you want  to,"  he said. He made 

the  coins  tinkle  in  the  empty  cash  drawer.  "I  don't  want  twelve  o'clock  to  strike  on  me 

without having heard God's name." 

 

So at the stroke of twelve Judge Arcadio entered his house laden with gifts for his 

wife. He sat on the bed to change his shoes while she wrapped up her body in a swathe of 

printed  silk.  She  pictured  her  appearance  in  the  new  dress  after  the  birth.  She  gave  her 

husband a kiss on the nose. He tried to avoid her, but she fell on top of him across the bed. 

They remained motionless. Judge Arcadio ran his hand over her back, feeling the warmth of 

the voluminous belly, even as he perceived the palpitation of her kidneys. 

She  raised  her  head.  Murmured  with  her  teeth  tight:  "Wait  and  I'll  go  close  the 

door." 

The  mayor waited until the last  house was set  up.  In twenty  hours  they'd built a 

whole street, wide and bare, which ended abruptly at the cemetery wall. After helping place 

the furniture, working shoulder to shoulder with the owners, the mayor, smothering, entered 

the nearest kitchen. Soup was boiling on a stove improvised from stones on the ground. He 

took the lid off the clay pot and breathed in the vapor for a moment. From across the stove a 

thin woman with large, peaceful eyes was observing him silently. 

"Lunchtime," the mayor said. 

The woman didn't answer. Without being invited, the mayor served himself a plate 

of soup. Then the woman went into the bedroom to get a chair and put it by the table for the 

mayor  to  sit  on.  While  he  was  having  his  soup,  he  examined  the  yard  with  a  kind  of 

reverent terror. Yesterday it had been a barren vacant lot. Now there was clothing hung to 

dry and two pigs were wallowing in the mud. 

"You can even plant something," he said. 

Without raising her head, the woman answered: "The pigs will eat it." Then, in the 

same plate, she served a piece of stewed meat, two slices of cassava, and half a plantain and 

took it to the table. In an obvious way, into that act of generosity she put all the indifference 

she was capable of. The mayor, smiling, sought the woman's eyes with his. 

"There's enough for all," he said. 

"May God give you indigestion," the woman said without looking at him. 

 

He let the bad wish pass. He dedicated himself entirely to his lunch, not concerned 

with the stream of sweat pouring down his neck. When he had finished, the woman took the 

empty plate, still not looking at him. 

"How long are you people going to go on like this?" the mayor asked. 

The woman spoke without changing her apathetic expression. 

"Until you people bring the dead you killed back to life." 

"It's different now," the mayor explained. "The new government is concerned with 

the well-being of its citizens. You people, on the other hand--" 

The woman interrupted him. 

"You're the same people with the same--" 

"A  district  like  this,  built  in  twenty-four  hours,  was  something  you  never  saw 

before," the mayor insisted. "We're trying to build a decent town." 

The woman took the clean clothes off the line and carried them into the bedroom. 

The mayor followed her with his eyes until he heard the answer: "This was a decent town 

before you people came." 

He didn't wait for any coffee. "Ingrates," he said. "We're giving you land and you 

still complain." The woman didn't answer. But when the mayor crossed the kitchen on his 

way  to  the  street,  she  muttered,  leaning  over  the  stove:  "It'll  be  worse  here.  But  we'll 

remember you people from the dead out back there." 

The mayor tried to sleep a siesta while the launches were arriving. But he couldn't 

fight the heat. The swelling on his cheek had begun to subside. Still, he didn't feel well. He 

followed  the  imperceptible  course  of  the  river  for  two  hours,  listening  to  the  buzz  of  a 

harvest fly inside the room. He didn't think about anything. 

When he heard the motors of the launches he got undressed, dried his sweat with a 

towel, and changed his uniform. Then he hunted for the harvest fly, grabbed it between his 

thumb and forefinger, and went into the street.  Out of the crowd waiting for the launches 

came a clean, well-dressed child who cut off  his path with a plastic submachine gun. The 

mayor gave him the harvest fly. 

 

A  moment  later,  sitting  in  Moisés  the  Syrian's  store,  he  watched  the  docking 

maneuvers  of  the  launches.  The  port  had  been  boiling  for  ten  minutes.  The  mayor  felt  a 

heaviness  in  his  stomach  and  a  touch  of  headache,  and  he  remembered  the  woman's  bad 

wishes.  Then  he  calmed  down  and  watched  the  passengers  coming  down  the  wooden 

gangplank, stretching their muscles after eight hours of immobility. 

"The same mess," he said. 

Moisés the Syrian brought him  to the realization of something new: a circus was 

coming.  The  mayor  noticed  that  it  was  true,  even  though  he  couldn't  say  why.  Maybe 

because of the poles and colored cloth all piled up on the roof of the launch, and because of 

two  women  completely  alike  wrapped  in  identical  flowered  dresses,  like  a  single  person 

repeated. 

"At least a circus is coming," he murmured. 

Moisés the Syrian talked about wild animals and jugglers. 

But the mayor thought about the circus in a different way With his legs stretched 

out, he looked at the tips of his boots. 

"The town's making progress," he said. 

Moisés  the  Syrian  stopped  fanning  himself.  "Do  you  know  how  much  I've  sold 

today?" he asked. The mayor didn't venture any guess, but waited for the answer. 

"Twenty-five centavos' worth," the Syrian said. 

At  that  instant  the  mayor  saw  the  telegrapher  opening  the  mailbag  to  give  Dr. 

Giraldo his letters. He called him over. The official mail came in a distinct envelope. He 

broke the seals and realized that they were routine communications and printed sheets with 

propaganda for the regime. When he finished reading them, the dock had been transformed: 

boxes  of  merchandise,  crates  of  chickens,  and  the  enigmatic  artifacts  of  the  circus.  Dusk 

was coming on. He stood up, sighing. 

"Twenty-five centavos." 

"Twenty-five centavos," repeated the Syrian in a firm voice with almost no accent. 

 

Dr. Giraldo watched the unloading of  the launches until the end.  He was the one 

who drew the mayor's attention to a vigorous woman of solemn bearing with several sets of 

bracelets  on  both  arms.  She  seemed  to  be  waiting  for  the  Messiah  under  a  multicolored 

parasol. The mayor didn't stop to think about the newcomer. 

"She must be the animal tamer," he said. 

"In a manner of speaking, you're right," Dr. Giraldo said, biting off his words with 

his double row of sharpened stones. "It's César Montero's mother-in-law." 

The  mayor continued on slowly. He looked at  his watch: twenty-five to four. At 

the door of  the barracks the  guard informed  him that Father  ءngel  had waited for  half an 

hour and would be back at four o'clock. 

On the street again, not knowing what to do, he saw the dentist in the window of 

his office and went over to ask him for a light. The dentist gave it to him, looking at the still 

swollen cheek. 

"I'm fine," the mayor said. 

He  opened  his  mouth.  The  dentist  observed:  "There  are  several  cavities  to  be 

filled." 

The mayor adjusted the revolver at his waist. "I'll be by," he decided. The dentist 

didn't change his expression. 

"Come  whenever  you  want  to,  to  see  if  my  wish  to  have  you  die  in  my  house 

comes true." 

The mayor patted him on the shoulder. "It won't," he commented, in a good mood. 

And he concluded, his arms open: "My teeth are above party politics." 

"So you won't get married?" 

Judge  Arcadio's  wife  opened  her  legs.  "No  hope  at  all,  Father,"  she  answered. 

"And even less now that I'm  going to  have a child." Father ءngel averted his gaze toward 

the river. A drowned cow, enormous, was coming down along  the streams of  the current, 

with several buzzards on top of it. 

"But it will be an illegitimate child," he said. 

 

"That doesn't matter," she said. "Arcadio treats me well now. If I make him marry 

me, then he'll feel tied down and make me pay for it." 

She  had taken off her clogs and was talking with  her knees apart, her toes riding 

the  crossbar  of  the  stool.  Her  fan  was  in  her  lap  and  her  arms  were  folded  over  her 

voluminous  belly.  "No  hope  at  all,  Father,"  she  repeated,  because  Father  ءngel  had 

remained silent. "Don Sabas bought me for two hundred pesos, sucked my juice out in three 

months, and  then threw  me into the street without a pin. If  Arcadio hadn't taken  me in,  I 

would have starved to death." She looked at the priest for the first time: "Or I would have 

had to become a whore." 

Father ءngel had been insisting for six months. 

"You should make him marry you and set up a home," he said. "This way, the way 

you're living now, not only leaves you in a precarious situation, but it's a bad example for 

the town." 

"It's better to do things frankly," she said. "Others do the same thing but with the 

lights out. Haven't you read the lampoons?" 

"That's  gossip,"  the  priest  said.  "You  have  to  legitimize  your  situation  and  put 

yourself out of the range of gossiping tongues." 

"Me?" she said. "I don't have to put myself out of the range of anything because I 

do everything in broad daylight. The proof of it is that nobody has wasted his time putting 

any lampoon on my door, and on the other hand, all the decent people on the square have 

theirs all papered up." 

"You're being foolish," the priest said, "but God has given you the good fortune of 

getting a man who respects you. For that very reason you ought to get married and legalize 

your home." 

"I don't understand those things," she said, "but in any case, just the way I am I've 

got a place to sleep and I've got plenty to eat." 

"What if he abandons you?" 

 

She bit her lip. She smiled enigmatically as she answered: "He won't abandon me, 

Father. I know why I can tell you that." 

Nor did Father ءngel consider himself defeated that time. He recommended that at 

least  she  come  to  mass.  She  replied  that  she  would,  "one  of  these  days,"  and  the  priest 

continued his walk, waiting for the time to meet with the mayor. One of the Syrians called 

his  attention  to  the  good  weather,  but  he  didn't  pay  any  heed.  He  was  interested  in  the 

details of the circus that was unloading its anxious wild animals in the bright afternoon. He 

stayed there until four o'clock. 

The mayor was taking leave of the dentist when he saw Father ءngel approaching. 

"Right on the dot," he said, and shook hands. "Right on the dot, even when it's not raining." 

Set to climb the steep stairs of the barracks, Father ءngel replied: "And even if the world is 

coming to an end." 

Two minutes later he was let into César Montero's room. 

While the confession was going on the mayor sat in the hall. He thought about the 

circus, of a woman  hanging onto a bit by  her teeth, twenty feet in the air, and a man in a 

blue uniform trimmed with  gold beating on a snare drum. Half an hour later Father ءngel 

left César Montero's room. 

"All set?" the mayor asked. 

"You  people  are  committing  a  crime,"  he  said.  "That  man  hasn't  eaten  for  five 

days. Only his constitution has allowed him to survive." 

"That's what he wants," the mayor said tranquilly. 

"That's not true," the priest said, putting a serene energy into his voice. "You gave 

orders that he wasn't to be fed." 

The mayor pointed at him. 

"Be careful, Father. You're violating the secrets of the confessional." 

"That's not part of his confession," the priest said. 

The  mayor  leaped  to  his  feet.  "Don't  get  all  worked  up,"  he  said,  laughing 

suddenly. "If it worries you so much, we'll fix it up right now." He called a policeman over 

 

and  gave  him  an  order  to  have  them  send  some  food  from  the  hotel  for  César  Montero. 

"Have them send over a whole chicken, nice and fat, with a dish of potatoes and a bowl of 

salad,"  he  said,  and  added,  addressing  the  priest:  "Everything  charged  to  the  town 

government, Father. So you can see how things have changed." 

Father ءngel lowered his head. 

"When are you sending him off?" 

"The launches leave tomorrow," the  mayor said. "If  he listens to reason  tonight, 

he'll go tomorrow. He just has to realize that I'm trying to do him a favor." 

"A slightly expensive favor," the priest said. 

"There's no favor that doesn't cost the person who gets it some money," the mayor 

said. He fixed his eyes on Father Angel's clear blue eyes and added: "I hope you've made 

him understand all those things." 

Father  ءngel  didn't  answer.  He  went  down  the  stairs  and  said  goodbye  from  the 

landing with a dull snort. Then the  mayor crossed the hall and went into César Montero's 

room without knocking. 

It  was  a  simple  room:  a  wash  basin  and  an  iron  bed.  César  Montero,  unshaven, 

dressed in the same clothing that he had been wearing when he left his house on Tuesday of 

the week before, was lying on the bed. He didn't even  move  his eyes when  he  heard the 

mayor. "Now that you've settled your accounts with God," the latter said, "there's nothing 

more just than your doing the same with me." Pulling a chair over to the bed, he straddled 

it, his chest against the wicker back. César Montero concentrated  his attention on the roof 

beams. He didn't seem worried in spite of the fact that the damage of a long conversation 

with himself could be seen on the edges of his mouth. "You and I don't have to beat about 

the  bush,"  he  heard  the  mayor  say.  "You're  leaving  tomorrow.  If  you're  lucky,  in  two  or 

three months a special investigator will arrive. It's up to us to fill him in. 

On the launch arriving the following week, you'll return convinced that you did a 

stupid thing." 

He paused, but César Montero remained imperturbable. 

 

"Later on, between courts and lawyers, they'll get at least  twenty  thousand pesos 

out  of  you.  Or  more  should  the  special  investigator  see  to  it  that  he  tells  them  you're  a 

millionaire." 

César  Montero  turned  his  head  toward  him.  It  was  an  almost  imperceptible 

movement, but it made the bed-springs squeak. 

"All  in  all,"  the  mayor  went  on,  with  the  voice  of  a  spiritual  adviser,  "between 

twists and paper work, they'll nail you for two years if all goes well for you." 

He  felt  himself  being  examined  from  head  to  toe.  When  César  Montero's  gaze 

reached his eyes, he still hadn't stopped speaking. But he'd changed his tone. 

"Everything you've got you owe to me," he said. "There were orders to do you in. 

There  were  orders  to  murder  you  in  ambush  and  confiscate  your  livestock  so  the 

government  would  have  a  way  to  pay  off  the  enormous  expenses  of  the  elections  in  the 

whole department.  You  know  that other  mayors did it in other towns. Here, on  the other 

hand, we disobeyed the order." 

At  that  moment  he perceived the first sign that César Montero was thinking. He 

opened  his legs. His arms leaning on  the back of the chair, he responded to  the unspoken 

charge. 

"Not one penny of what you paid for your life went to  me,"  he said. "Everything 

was  spent  on  organizing  the  elections.  Now  the  new  government  has  decided  that  there 

should be peace and guarantees for everybody and I go on being broke on my salary while 

you're filthy with money. You got yourself a good deal." 

César Montero started the laborious process of getting up. When he was standing, 

the  mayor saw himself: tiny and sad,  face to  face with a  monumental beast. There was a 

kind of fervor in the look with which he followed him to the window. 

"The best deal in your life," he murmured. 

The  window  opened  onto  the  river.  César  Montero  didn't  recognize  it.  He  saw 

himself in a different  town, facing a  momentary river. "I'm trying to  help  you,"  he  heard 

behind him. "We all know that it was a matter of honor, but it'll be hard to prove. You did a 

 

stupid thing by tearing up the lampoon." At that instant a strong nauseating smell invaded 

the room. 

"The cow," the mayor said. "It must have washed up somewhere." 

César Montero remained at the window, indifferent  to the stench of putrefaction. 

There was nobody on the street. At the dock, three anchored launches, whose crews were 

hanging  up  their hammocks for sleep. On the  following day, at seven in the  morning, the 

picture would be different: for half an hour the port would be in a turmoil, waiting for the 

prisoner to embark. César Montero sighed. He put  his hands into  his pockets and, with a 

resolute air, but without haste, he summed up his thoughts in two words: "How much?" 

The answer was immediate: "Five thousand pesos in yearlings." 

"Add  five  more  calves,"  César  Montero  said,  "and  send  me  out  this  very  night, 

after the movies, on an express launch." 

 

CHAPTER 5 

THE  LAUNCH blew its whistle, turned around in  midstream, and  the crowd clustered on 

the  dock  and  the  women  in  the  windows  saw  Rosario  Montero  for  the  last  time,  sitting 

beside her mother on the same tin-plate trunk with which she had disembarked in the town 

seven  years  before.  Shaving  at  the  window  of  his  office,  Dr.  Octavio  Giraldo  had  the 

impression that, in a certain way, it was a return trip to reality. 

Dr.  Giraldo  had  seen  her  on  the  afternoon  of  her  arrival,  with  her  shabby 

schoolteacher's  uniform  and  men's  shoes,  ascertaining  at  the  dock  who  would  charge  the 

least to carry her trunk to the school. She seemed disposed to grow old without ambition in 

that town whose name she had seen written for the first time--according to what she herself 

told--on the slip of paper  that she picked from a  hat when  they were drawing among the 

eleven candidates for  the six positions available. She settled down in a small room at the 

school with an iron bed and a washstand, spending her free time embroidering tablecloths 

while  she  boiled  her  mush  on  the  little  oil  stove.  That  same  year,  at  Christmas,  she  met 

César Montero at a school fair. He was a wild bachelor of obscure origins, grown wealthy 

in  the  lumber  business,  who  lived  in  the  virgin  jungle  among  half-wild  dogs  and  only 

appeared  in  town  on  rare  occasions,  always  unshaven,  with  metal-tipped  boots  and  a 

double-barreled  shotgun.  It  was  as  if  she  had  drawn  the  prize  piece  of  paper  again,  Dr. 

Giraldo was thinking, his chin daubed with lather, when a nauseating whiff drew him out of 

his memories. 

A flock of buzzards scattered on the opposite shore, frightened by the waves from 

the launch. The stench of rottenness hung over the wharf for a moment, mingling with the 

morning breeze, and even penetrated deep inside the houses. 

"Still there,  God damn it,"  the  mayor exclaimed on  the balcony of  his bedroom, 

watching the buzzards scatter. "Fucking cow." 

He  covered  his  nose  with  a  handkerchief,  went  into  the  room,  and  closed  the 

balcony door. The smell persisted inside. Without taking off his hat, he hung the mirror on 

 

a nail and began  the careful attempt at shaving  his still rather inflamed cheek.  A  moment 

later the impresario of the circus knocked at the door. 

The mayor had him sit down, observing him in the mirror while he shaved. He was 

wearing  a  black-and-white  checkered  shirt,  riding  breeches  with  leggings,  and  carried  a 

whip with which he gave himself systematic taps on the knee. 

"I've  already  had  the  first  complaints  about  you  people,"  the  mayor  said  as  he 

finished dragging the razor over the stubble of two weeks of desperation. "Just last night." 

"What might that be?" 

"That you're sending out boys to steal cats." 

"That's not true," the impresario said. "Every cat that's brought to us we buy by the 

pound, without asking where it comes from, to feed the wild animals." 

"Are they thrown in alive?" 

"Oh, no," the impresario said. "That would arouse the animals' instinct of cruelty." 

After washing, the mayor turned to him, rubbing his face with the towel. Until then 

he hadn't noticed that he was wearing rings with colored stones on almost all his fingers. 

"Well,  you're  going  to  have  to  think  up  some  other  way,"  he  said.  "Hunt 

crocodiles, if you want, or take advantage of the fish that are going to waste in this weather. 

But live cats, don't mess with them." 

The  impresario  shrugged  his  shoulders  and  followed  the  mayor  to  the  street. 

Groups of men were chatting by the dock in spite of the foul odor of the cow beached in the 

brambles on the opposite bank. 

"You sissies," the mayor shouted. "Instead of standing around there gossiping like 

women,  you should  have been busy since yesterday organizing an expedition  to float  that 

cow away." 

Some men surrounded him. 

"Fifty  pesos,"  the  mayor  proposed,  "for  the  one  who  brings  me  the  cow's  horns 

within an hour." 

 

A  disorder  of  voices  exploded  at  the  end  of  the  dock.  Some  men  had  heard  the 

mayor's offer and were leaping into  their canoes, shouting  mutual challenges as they cast 

off. "A hundred pesos," the mayor doubled, all enthusiastic. "Fifty for each horn." He took 

the  impresario  to  the  end  of  the  dock.  They  both  waited  until  the  first  craft  reached  the 

dunes on the other shore. Then the mayor turned to the impresario, smiling. 

"This is a happy town," he said. 

The impresario nodded. "The only thing wrong is something like this," the mayor 

went on. "People think too much about foolishness because there's nothing to do." A small 

group of children had slowly been forming around them. 

"There's the circus," the impresario said. 

The mayor was dragging him along by the arm toward the square. 

"What do they do?" he asked. 

"Everything,"  the impresario said. "We've got a complete show, for children and 

for adults." 

"Thai's  not  enough,"  the  mayor  replied.  "It's  got  to  be  within  the  reach  of 

everybody." 

"We've kept that in mind too," the impresario said. 

Together they went to a vacant lot behind the movie theater, where they'd begun to 

raise the tent. Taciturn-looking men and women were taking cloths and bright colors out of 

the enormous trucks plated with fancy tin-work. As he followed the impresario through the 

crush of human beings and odds and ends, shaking everybody's hand, the mayor felt as if he 

were in the midst of a shipwreck. A robust woman with resolute movements and teeth that 

were almost completely capped with gold examined his hand after shaking it. 

"There's something strange in your future," she said. 

The  mayor  drew  his  hand  back,  unable  to  repress  a  momentary  feeling  of 

depression.  The  impresario  gave  the  woman  a  tap  on  the  arm  with  his  whip.  "Leave  the 

lieutenant  alone,"  he  said  without  stopping,  escorting  the  mayor  to  the  back  of  the  lot, 

where the animals were. 

 

"Do you believe in all that?" he asked him. 

"That depends," said the mayor. 

"They've  never been able to convince  me,"  the impresario said. "When a person 

gets mixed up in things like that he ends up believing only in human will." 

The  mayor contemplated the animals, who were drowsy with the heat. The cages 

exhaled  a  bitter,  warm  vapor  and  there  was  a  kind  of  hopeless  anguish  in  the  measured 

breathing of the wild creatures. The impresario stroked the nose of a leopard with his whip 

as it twisted like a mime, growling. 

"What's the name?" the mayor asked. 

"Aristotle." 

"I meant the woman," the mayor explained. 

"Oh," the impresario said. "We call her Casandra, Mirror of the Future." 

The mayor put on a desolate expression. 

"I'd like to go to bed with her," he said. 

"Everything's possible," said the impresario. 

The widow Montiel opened the windows of her bedroom, murmuring: "Poor men." 

She  put  her  night  table  in  order,  returned  her  rosary  and  prayer  book  to  the  drawer,  and 

wiped the soles of  her  mallow-colored slippers on the jaguar skin laid out in front of the 

bed.  Then  she  took  a  complete  turn  about  the  room  to  lock  the  dressing  table,  the  three 

doors to the wardrobe, and a square cupboard on which there was a plaster Saint Raphael. 

Finally she locked the room. 

As she was going down the broad staircase made of stones with carved labyrinths 

on them, she thought about the strange fate of  Rosario Montero. When she saw her cross 

the corner of the dock with the determined composure of a schoolgirl who has been taught 

not  to  turn  her  head,  the  widow  Montiel,  looking  out  through  the  chinks  of  her  balcony, 

sensed that something that had begun a long time ago had finally ended. 

On the landing of  the stairs, the country-fair bustle of  her courtyard came  up  to 

meet her. To one side of the railing there was a scaffolding with cheeses wrapped in fresh 

 

leaves; farther on, in an outside gallery, sacks of salt and skins full of honey were piled up; 

and  to  the  rear  of  the  courtyard,  a  stable  with  mules  and  horses,  and  saddles  on  the 

crossbeams.  The  house  was  impregnated  with  a  persistent  beast-of-burden  smell  mingled 

with another smell, of tanning and the grinding of cane. 

In the office the widow said good morning to Mr. Carmichael, who was laying out 

bundles of banknotes on the desk while he jotted down the amounts in the ledger. When she 

opened the window onto the river, the nine o'clock light entered the living room, which was 

overloaded  with  cheap  decorations,  great  overstuffed  chairs  upholstered  in  gray,  and  an 

enlarged  portrait  of  José  Montiel,  with  a  funeral  wreath  around  the  frame.  The  widow 

noticed the whiff of rottenness before she saw the boats on the dunes of the far shore. 

"What's going on on the other bank?" she asked. 

"They're trying to float a dead cow," Mr. Carmichael answered. 

"So that's it,"  the widow said. "All night long  I was dreaming about  that smell." 

She looked at  Mr. Carmichael, absorbed in his work, and added: "Now all we need is the 

deluge." 

Mr. Carmichael spoke without raising his head. 

"It started two weeks ago." 

"That's right," the widow admitted. "Now we've reached the end. All that's left to 

do is to lie down in a grave in the sun and the dew until death comes for us." 

Mr. Carmichael listened to her without interrupting his accounts. "For years we've 

been complaining that nothing ever happened in this town," the widow went on. "All of a 

sudden  the  tragedy  starts,  as  if  God  had  fixed  everything  so  that  what  had  stopped 

happening for so many years would begin to happen." 

Mr. Carmichael turned to look at her from the safe and saw her with her elbows on 

the window, her eyes fixed on the opposite shore. She was wearing a black dress with long 

sleeves and was biting her nails. 

"When the rain stops, things will get better," Mr. Carmichael said. 

 

"It won't stop," the widow predicted. "Misfortunes  never come alone. Didn't  you 

see Rosario Montero?" 

Mr.  Carmichael  had  seen  her.  "All  this  is  a  meaningless  scandal,"  he  said.  "If  a 

person pays attention to lampoons he ends up going crazy." 

"The lampoons," sighed the widow. 

"They've already put mine up," Mr. Carmichael said. 

"Yours?" 

"Mine,"  Mr.  Carmichael  confirmed.  "They  put  it  up,  quite  large  and  quite 

complete, on Saturday of last week. It looked like a movie poster." 

The  widow  pulled  a  chair  over  to  the  desk.  "This  is  infamous,"  she  exclaimed. 

"There's nothing  that can be said about a  family as exemplary as  yours." Mr. Carmichael 

wasn't alarmed. 

"Since  my wife is white,  the  kids have come out all colors," he explained. "Just 

imagine, eleven of them." 

"Of course," the widow said. 

"Well, the lampoon said that I'm only the father of the black ones. And they listed 

the fathers of the others. They even involved Don Chepe Montiel, may he rest in peace." 

"My husband!" 

"Yours and those of four other ladies," Mr. Carmichael said. 

The widow began  to sob.  "Luckily  my daughters are  far away," she said. "They 

say they don't ever want to come back to this savage country where students are murdered 

in the street, and I tell them that they're right, that they should stay in Paris for good." Mr. 

Carmichael turned his chair half around, understanding that the embarrassing daily episode 

had begun once more. 

"You've got no reason to worry," he said. 

"Quite the contrary," the widow sobbed. "I'm the first one who should have packed 

up her goods and got away from this town, even if this land and the business that are so tied 

 

up with our misfortune are lost. No, Mr. Carmichael: I don't want gold basins to spit blood 

into." 

Mr. Carmichael tried to console her. 

"You have to face up to your responsibilities," he said. "You can't throw a fortune 

out the window." 

"Money is the devil's dung," the widow said. 

"But in this case it's also the result of Don Chepe Montiel's hard work." 

The widow bit her fingers. 

"You know that's not true," she replied. "It's ill-gotten wealth and the first to pay 

for it by dying without confession was José Montiel." 

It wasn't the first time she'd said it. 

"The  blame,  naturally,  belongs  to  that  criminal,"  she  exclaimed,  pointing  to  the 

mayor,  who  was  going  along  the  opposite  sidewalk  on  the  arm  of  the  circus  impresario. 

"But I'm the one who suffers the expiation." 

Mr. Carmichael left  her. He put  the bundles of bills, fastened with rubber bands, 

into a cardboard box, and  from  the door  to the courtyard,  he called out the  names of the 

peasants in alphabetical order. 

While  the  men  were  receiving  their  Wednesday  pay,  the  widow  Montiel  heard 

them  pass  without  answering  their  greetings.  She  lived  alone  in  the  gloomy  nine-room 

house where Big  Mama  had died and which José  Montiel had bought without imagining 

that his widow would have to endure her solitude in it until death. At night, while she went 

about  through  the  empty  rooms  with  the  insecticide  bomb,  she  would  find  Big  Mama 

squashing lice in the hallways, and she would ask her: "When am I going to die?" But that 

happy communication with the beyond only  managed to increase her uncertainty, because 

the answers, like those of all the dead, were silly and contradictory. 

A  little  after  eleven  o'clock,  through  her  tears,  the  widow  saw  Father  ءngel 

crossing the square. "Father, Father," she called, feeling that she was taking a final step with 

that call. But Father ءngel didn't hear her. He had knocked at the door of the widow Asيs, 

 

on the opposite sidewalk, and the door had opened partway in a surreptitious manner to let 

him in. 

On the porch that overflowed with the song of birds, the widow Asيs was lying on 

a canvas chair, her face covered with a handkerchief soaked in Florida water. From the way 

he  knocked on the door she  knew it was Father Angel, but she prolonged the  momentary 

relief until she heard the greeting. Then she uncovered her face, devastated by insomnia. 

"Forgive me, Father," she said. "I didn't expect you so early." 

Father  ءngel  ignored  the  fact  that  he  had  been  invited  to  lunch.  He  excused 

himself, a little confused, saying  that  he, too,  had spent the  morning with a  headache and 

had preferred to cross the square before the heat began. 

"It doesn't matter," the widow said. "I just meant that I didn't want you to find me 

looking like a wreck." 

The  priest  took  from  his  pocket  a  breviary  that  was  losing  its  binding.  "If  you 

want, you can rest a while more and I'll pray," he said. The widow objected. 

"I feel better," she said. 

She walked to the end of the porch, her eyes closed, and on the way back she laid 

out the  handkerchief with extreme tidiness on  the arm of the  folding chair. When she sat 

down opposite Father ءngel she looked several years younger. 

"Father," she said then, without any drama, "I have need of your help." 

Father ءngel put his breviary into his pocket. 

"At your service." 

"It's Roberto Asيs again." 

Against his promise to forget about the lampoon, Roberto Asيs the day before had 

departed until Saturday, and returned home unexpectedly that same night. Since then, until 

dawn, when fatigue overcame him, he had been sitting in the darkness of the room, waiting 

for his wife's supposed lover. 

Father ءngel listened to her, perplexed. 

"There's no basis for that," he said. 

 

"You don't know the Asيses, Father," the widow replied. "They carry hell in their 

imaginations." 

"Rebeca knows my view of the lampoons," he said. "But if you want, I can talk to 

Roberto Asيs too." 

"By  no  means,"  said  the  widow.  "That  would  just  be  stoking  the  coals.  On  the 

other  hand,  if  you  could  talk  about  the  lampoons  in  your  Sunday  sermon,  I'm  sure  that 

Roberto Asيs would feel called upon to reflect." 

Father ءngel opened his arms. 

"Impossible,"  he  exclaimed.  "It  would  be  giving  the  thing  an  importance  that  it 

doesn't have." 

"Nothing's more important than avoiding a crime." 

"Do you think it can reach those extremes?" 

"Not only do I think so," the widow said, "but I'm sure that I won't have the means 

to prevent it." 

A moment later they sat down at the table. A barefoot servant girl brought rice and 

beans,  stewed  vegetables,  and  a  platter  of  meatballs  covered  with  a  thick  brown  sauce. 

Father ءngel served himself in silence. The hot peppers, the profound silence of the house, 

and  the  feeling of  uneasiness  that  filled his  heart at that  moment carried him back to  his 

narrow little neophyte's room in the burning  noon of  Macondo. On a day like  that, dusty 

and hot, he had denied Christian burial to a hanged man whom  the stiff-necked inhabitants 

of Macondo  had refused to bury.  He  unbuttoned the collar of his cassock to let the sweat 

out. 

"All right," he said to the widow. "Then make sure that Roberto Asيs doesn't miss 

mass on Sunday." 

The widow Asيs promised him. 

Dr. Giraldo and  his wife, who  never took a siesta, spent  the afternoon reading a 

story  by  Dickens.  They  were  on  the  inside  terrace,  he  in  a  hammock,  listening  with  his 

fingers interlaced behind his neck, she with the book in her lap, reading with her back to the 

 

lozenges  of  light  where  the  geraniums  glowed.  She  was  reading  dispassionately,  with  a 

professional emphasis, not shifting her position in the chair. She didn't raise her head until 

the end, but even  then she remained with the book open on  her knees while her husband 

washed in the basin of the washstand. The heat foretold a storm. 

"Is it a long short story?" she asked, after thinking about it carefully. 

With scrupulous  movements learned in the operating room,  the doctor withdrew 

his head from the basin. "They say it's a short novel," he said in front of the mirror, putting 

brilliantine on his hair. "I would say, rather, that it's a long short story." With his fingers he 

rubbed the vaseline into his scalp and concluded: "Critics might say that it's a short story, 

but a long one." 

He got dressed in white linen,  helped by his wife. She could have been  mistaken 

for an older sister, not only because of the peaceful devotion with which she attended him, 

but  from  the  coldness  of  her  eyes,  which  made  her  look  like  an  older  person.  Before 

leaving, Dr. Giraldo showed her the list and order of his visits, should an urgent case come 

up, and he moved the hands on the clock chart in the waiting room: The doctor will return 

at 5 o 'clock. 

The  street  was  buzzing  with  heat.  Dr.  Giraldo walked  along  the  shady  sidewalk 

pursued by a foreboding: in spite of the harshness of the air, it wouldn't rain that afternoon. 

The  buzz  of  the  harvest  flies  intensified  the  solitude  of  the  port,  but  the  cow  had  been 

removed and dragged off by the current, and the rotten smell had left an enormous gap in 

the atmosphere. 

The telegrapher called to him from the hotel. 

"Did you get a telegram?" 

Dr. Giraldo hadn't. 

"  'Advise  conditions  office,  signed  Arcofلn,'  "  the  telegrapher  quoted  from 

memory. 

They  went  to  the  telegraph  office  together.  While  the  physician  was  writing  a 

reply, the civil servant began to nod. 

 

"It's the muriatic acid," the doctor explained with great scientific conviction. And 

in spite of his foreboding, he added as consolation when he'd finished writing: "Maybe it'll 

rain tonight." 

The telegrapher counted the words. The doctor didn't pay any attention to him. He 

was hanging on a fat book lying open by the key. He asked if it was a novel. 

"Les Misérables, Victor Hugo," telegraphed the telegrapher. He stamped the copy 

of the message and came back to the railing with the book. "I think this should last us until 

December." 

For  years  Dr.  Giraldo  had  known  that  the  telegrapher  spent  his  free  time 

transmitting poems to  the lady telegrapher in San  Bernardo del  Viento. He  hadn't  known 

that he also read her novels. 

"Now, this is serious," he said, thumbing through the well-used tome which awoke 

in  his  memory  the  confused  emotions  of  an  adolescent.  "Alexandre  Dumas  would  have 

been more appropriate." 

"She likes this one," the telegrapher explained. 

"Have you ever met her?" 

The telegrapher shook his head no. 

"But it doesn't matter," he said. "I'd recognize her in any part of the world by the 

little jumps she always puts on the R" 

That afternoon Dr. Giraldo had reserved an hour for Don Sabas. He found him in 

bed exhausted, wrapped in a towel from the waist up. 

"Was the candy good?" the doctor asked. 

"It's  the  heat,"  Don  Sabas  lamented,  turning  his  enormous  grandmother's  body 

toward the door. "I took my injection after lunch." 

Dr.  Giraldo  opened  his  bag  on  a  table  placed  by  the  window.  The  harvest  flies 

were buzzing in the courtyard, and the house had a botanical heat. Seated in the courtyard, 

Don Sabas urinated like a languid spring. When the doctor put the amber liquid in the test 

 

tube, the patient felt comforted. He said, watching the analysis: "Be very careful, Doctor. I 

don't want to die without finding out how this novel comes out." 

Dr. Giraldo dropped a blue tablet into the sample. 

"What novel?" 

"The lampoons." 

Don Sabas followed him with a mild look until he finished heating the tube on the 

alcohol lamp. He sniffed it. The faded eyes of the patient awaited him with a question. 

"It's fine," the doctor said as he poured out the sample into the courtyard. Then he 

scrutinized Don Sabas. "Are you hung up on that business too?" 

"Not me," the sick man said. "But I'm like a Jap enjoying the people's fright." 

Dr. Giraldo prepared the hypodermic syringe. 

"Besides," Don Sabas went on to say, "they already put mine up two days ago. The 

same nonsense: my sons' mess and the story about the donkeys." 

The doctor tightened Don Sabas's artery with a rubber hose. The patient insisted on 

the story about the donkeys; he had to retell it because the doctor didn't think he'd heard it. 

"It was a donkey deal I made some twenty years ago," he said. "It so happened that 

the  donkeys  I  sold  were  found  dead  in  the  morning  two  days  later,  with  no  signs  of 

violence." 

He offered  his arm with its flaccid flesh so  that  the doctor could take the blood 

sample. When Dr. Giraldo covered the prick with cotton, Don Sabas flexed his arm. 

"Well, do you know what people made up?" 

The doctor shook his head. 

"The rumor went around that I had gone into the yard myself at night and shot the 

donkeys on the inside, sticking the revolver up their assholes." 

Dr. Giraldo put the glass tube with the blood sample into his pocket. 

"That story's got every appearance of being true," he said. 

"It was snakes," Don Sabas said, sitting in bed like an  Oriental idol. "But in any 

case, you have to be a fool to write a lampoon about something that everybody knows." 

 

"That's always been a characteristic of lampoons," the doctor said. "They say what 

everybody knows, which is almost always sure to be the truth." 

Don  Sabas  suffered  a  momentary  relapse.  "Really,"  he  murmured,  drying  the 

sweat on his dizzy eyelids. He recovered immediately: "What's happening is that there isn't 

a single fortune in this country that doesn't have some dead donkey behind it." 

The  doctor  received  the  phrase  leaning  over  the  wash-stand.  He  saw  his  own 

reaction  reflected  in  the  water:  a  dental  system  so  perfect  that  it  didn't  seem  natural. 

Looking at the patient over his shoulder, he said: "I've always believed, my dear Don Sabas, 

that shame-lessness is your only virtue." 

The patient grew enthusiastic. His doctor's knocks had produced a kind of sudden 

youth  in  him.  "That  and  my  sexual  prowess,"  he  said,  accompanying  the  words  with  a 

bending  of  the  arm  that  might  have  been  a  stimulant  for  the  circulation,  but  which  the 

doctor took as an express lewdness. Don Sabas gave a little bounce on his buttocks. 

"That's why I die laughing at the lampoons," he went on. "They say that my sons 

get  carried  away  by  every  little  girl  who  begins  to  blossom  in  these  woods,  and  I  say: 

they're their father's sons." 

Before  taking  his  leave,  Dr.  Giraldo  had  to  listen  to  a  spectral  recapitulation  of 

Don Sabas's sexual adventures. 

"Happy  youth,"  the patient  finally exclaimed. "Happy  times, when a little  girl of 

sixteen cost less than a heifer." 

"Those memories will increase your sugar concentration," the doctor said. 

Don Sabas opened his mouth. 

"On the contrary," he replied. "They're better than your damned insulin shots." 

When he reached the street the doctor had the impression that a delicious soup had 

begun to circulate in Don Sabas's arteries. But something else was worrying him then: the 

lampoons. For some days rumors had been reaching his office. That afternoon, after visiting 

Don Sabas, he realized that he really hadn't heard talk about anything else for a week. 

 

He made several visits during the next hour and at every one they talked about the 

lampoons.  He  listened  to  the  stories  without  making  any  comments,  with  an  apparently 

indifferent little smile, but really trying to come to a conclusion. He was on his way back to 

his  office  when  Father  Angel,  who  was  coming  from  the  widow  Montiel's,  rescued  him 

from his reflections. 

"How are those patients doing, Doctor?" Father ءngel asked. 

"Mine are fine, Father," the doctor answered. "What about yours?" 

Father ءngel bit his lips. He took the doctor by the arm and they began to cross the 

square. 

"Why do you ask?" 

"I don't know," the doctor said. "I've heard that there's a serious epidemic among 

your clientele." 

Father ءngel made a deviation that to the doctor seemed deliberate. 

"I've  just  come  from  the  widow  Montiel,"  he  said.  "That  poor  woman's  nerves 

have got her worn out." 

"It might be her conscience," the doctor diagnosed. 

"It's an obsession with death." 

Although they lived in opposite directions, Father  ءngel accompanied  him to  his 

office. 

"Seriously, Father"--the doctor picked up the thread--"what do you think about the 

lampoons?" 

"I don't think about them," the priest said. "But if you make me, I'd say that they're 

the work of envy in an exemplary town." 

"We  doctors  didn't  even  diagnose  like  that  in  the  Middle  Ages,"  Dr.  Giraldo 

replied. 

They stopped in front of the office. Fanning himself slowly, Father ءngel asserted 

for the second  time that day that "one  mustn't  give things an importance they don't have." 

Dr. Giraldo felt shaken by a hidden desperation. 

 

"How do you know, Father, that there's nothing true in what the lampoons say?" 

"I'd know it from the confessional." 

The doctor looked him coldly in the eyes. 

"All the more serious if you don't know it from the confessional," he said. 

That afternoon Father ءngel noticed that in the poor people's houses, too, they were 

talking about the lampoons, but in a different way and even with a healthy merriment. He 

ate  without  appetite,  after  attending  prayers  with  a  thorn  of  pain  in  his  head,  which  he 

attributed to the meatballs for lunch. Then he looked at the moral classification of the movie 

and, for the first time in his life, felt an obscure pride as he gave the twelve round tolls of 

absolute  prohibition.  Finally  he  put  a  stool  by  the  street  door,  feeling  that  his  head  was 

bursting with pain, and got ready to verify publicly which ones were going into the movie 

contrary to his admonition. 

The  mayor  went  in.  Sitting  in  a  corner  of  the  orchestra  section,  he  smoked  two 

cigarettes before the film began. His gum was completely normal, but his body still suffered 

from the memory of the past nights, and the wear and tear of the analgesics and cigarettes 

brought on nausea. 

The movie house was a courtyard surrounded by a cement wall, covered with zinc 

plates  halfway  up  in  the  orchestra,  and  with  grass  that  seemed  to  revive  every  morning, 

fertilized with chewing gum and cigarette butts. For a moment, the mayor saw the benches 

of unplaned wood floating in the air over the iron grating that separated the orchestra seats 

from the balcony, and he noticed a vertiginous undulation in the space on the back wall that 

was painted white, where the film was projected. 

He felt better when the lights went out. Then the strident music of the loudspeaker 

ceased  but  the  vibration  of  the  electric  generator  set  up  in  a  wooden  shack  next  to  the 

projector became more intense. 

Before  the  movie  there  were  some  advertising  slides.  A  trooping  of  muffled 

whispers, confused steps, and suppressed laughter  moved the darkness for brief moments. 

 

Momentarily surprised, the mayor thought that that clandestine entry had the character of a 

subversive act against Father Angel's rigid norms. 

Although it might only have been because of the wake of cologne, he recognized 

the manager of the movie when he passed by. 

"You  bandit,"  he  whispered,  grabbing  him  by  the  arm.  "You'll  have  to  pay  a 

special tax." 

Laughing between his teeth, the manager took the next seat. 

"It's a good picture," he said. 

"As  far  as  I'm  concerned,"  the  mayor  said,  "I'd  like  them  all  to  be  bad.  There's 

nothing more boring than a moral movie." 

Years  before,  no  one  had  taken  that  censorship  of  the  bells  very  seriously.  But 

every  Sunday,  at  the  main  mass,  Father  ءngel  would  point  out  from  the  pulpit  and  drive 

from the church the women who had contravened his warning during the week. 

"The back door has been my salvation," the manager said. 

The  mayor  began  to  follow  the  ancient  newsreel.  He  spoke,  pausing  every  time 

there was an item of interest on the screen. 

"It's  the  same  with  everything,"  he  said.  "The  priest  won't  give  communion  to 

women in short sleeves and they keep on wearing short sleeves, but they put on fake long 

sleeves before going to mass." 

After  the  newsreel,  the  coming  attractions  for  the  next  week  were  shown.  They 

watched them in silence. At the end, the manager leaned over toward the mayor. 

"Lieutenant," he whispered. "Buy this mess from me." 

The mayor didn't take his eyes off the screen. 

"It's not a good business." 

"Not for  me," the  manager said. "But on the other hand, it would be a gold mine 

for you. It's obvious: the priest wouldn't come to you with the business of his little bells." 

The mayor reflected before answering. 

"It sounds good to me," he said. 

 

But he didn't say anything concrete. He put his feet on the bench in front and lost 

himself  in  the  turns  of  a  tangled  drama  which  in  the  end,  according  to  what  he  thought, 

didn't deserve even four bells. 

When  he  left  the  movie  he  lingered  at  the  poolroom,  where  they  were  playing 

lotto. It was hot and the radio was sweating out some stony music. After drinking a bottle of 

soda water, the mayor went off to bed. 

He  walked  unconcerned  along  the  riverbank,  sensing  the  flooded  river  in  the 

darkness,  the  sound  of  its  entrails  and  its  smell  of  a  huge  animal.  Opposite  the  bedroom 

door he stopped abruptly. Taking a leap backward, he unholstered his revolver. 

"Come out where I can see you," he said in a tense voice, "or I'll blow your head 

off." 

A very sweet voice came out of the darkness. 

"Don't be so nervous, Lieutenant." 

He stood pointing  his revolver until the  hidden person came out into the light. It 

was Casandra. 

"You escaped just by a hair," the mayor said. 

He had  her come  to the bedroom. For a long time  Casandra spoke,  following an 

irregular course. She sat on the hammock and while she spoke she took off  her shoes and 

looked with a certain candor at her toenails, which were painted a vivid red. 

Sitting  opposite  her,  fanning  himself  with  his  cap,  the  mayor  followed  the 

conversation with conventional correctness. He had gone back to smoking. When it struck 

twelve, she lay face down in the hammock, reached out an arm adorned with a set of noisy 

bracelets, and pinched his nose. 

"It's late, boy," she said. "Turn out the light." 

The mayor smiled. 

"It wasn't for that," he said. 

She didn't understand. 

"Do you know how to tell fortunes?" the mayor asked. 

 

Casandra sat  up in the  hammock again. "Of course," she said. And then,  having 

understood, she put her shoes on. 

"But I didn't bring my cards," she said. 

"Anyone who eats dirt"--the mayor smiled--"carries his own soil." 

He took out a worn deck from the bottom of his suitcase. She examined each card, 

front and back, with serious attention.  "The other cards are  better," she said. "But in any 

case, the important thing is the  message." The  mayor pulled over a small table, sat down 

across from her, and Casandra laid out the cards. 

"Love or business?" she asked. 

The mayor dried the sweat on his hands. 

"Business," he said. 

 

CHAPTER 6 

ASTRAY DONKEY sought shelter from the rain under the eaves of the parish house and it 

stayed there all night, kicking against the bedroom wall. It was a night without rest. After 

having managed a sudden sleep at dawn, Father ءngel woke up with the feeling that he was 

covered with dust. The spikenards sleeping in the drizzle, the smell of the toilet, and then 

the lugubrious interior of the church after the five o'clock tolling had faded away all seemed 

to be conspiring to make that a difficult dawn. 

From the sacristy, where he dressed to say mass, he heard Trinidad harvesting her 

dead mice, while the stealthy weekday women entered the church.  During  the  mass, with 

progressive  exasperation,  he  noticed  his  acolyte's  mistakes,  his  backwoods  Latin,  and  he 

achieved  at  the  last  moment  the  feeling  of  frustration  that  tormented  him  during  the  evil 

hours of his life. 

He  was  on  his  way  to  breakfast  when  Trinidad  cut  him  off  with  a  radiant 

expression.  "Six  more  down  today,"  she  said,  shaking  the  dead  mice  in  the  box.  Father 

ءngel tried to rise above the confusion. 

"Wonderful,"  he  said.  "At  this  rate  we  ought  to  find  their  nests  and  finish  the 

extermination completely." 

Trinidad  had  found  the  nests.  She  explained  how  she'd  located  the  holes  in 

different  parts  of  the  church,  especially  in  the  tower  and  the  baptistery,  and  how  she'd 

plugged them up with asphalt. That morning she'd found a frantic mouse beating against the 

wall after having looked all night for the door to its house. 

They went out into the small paved courtyard, where the first shoots of spikenard 

were beginning to grow erect. Trinidad took her time throwing the dead mice into the toilet. 

When he went into his study, Father ءngel got ready to eat breakfast,  having removed the 

small tablecloth  under which every  morning, like a kind of  magician's trick, the breakfast 

that the widow Asيs sent him appeared. 

 

"I'd  forgotten  that  I  couldn't  buy  the  arsenic,"  Trinidad  said  when  she  came  in. 

"Don Lalo Moscote says that it can't be sold without a doctor's prescription." 

"It  won't  be  necessary,"  Father  ءngel  said.  "They'll  all  smother  to  death  in  their 

dens." 

He brought the chair over to the table and began to set up the cup, the plate with 

slices of plain tamales, and the coffeepot engraved with a Japanese dragon, while Trinidad 

was opening the window. "It's always best to be prepared in case they come back," she said. 

Father ءngel poured  his coffee and suddenly  he stopped and looked at Trinidad, with  her 

shapeless robe and her invalid's high shoes, as she came over to the table. 

"You worry too much about that," he said. 

Father ءngel hadn't noticed then or earlier any indication of restlessness in the tight 

tangle  of  Trinidad's  eyebrows.  Unable  to  suppress  a  slight  trembling  of  his  fingers,  he 

finished pouring himself the coffee, put in two spoonfuls of sugar, and began to stir the cup, 

with his gaze on the crucifix hanging on the wall. 

"How long has it been since you confessed?" 

"Last Friday," Trinidad answered. 

"Tell me something," Father ءngel said. "Have you ever hidden any sin from me?" 

Trinidad nodded no. 

Father ءngel closed his eyes. Suddenly he stopped stirring the coffee, put the spoon 

on the plate, and grabbed Trinidad by the arm. 

"Kneel down," he said. 

Disconcerted,  Trinidad  put  the  cardboard  box  on  the  floor  and  knelt  in  front  of 

him. "Say an act of contrition," Father ءngel told her, his voice having managed the paternal 

tone  of  the  confessional.  Trinidad  clenched  her  fists  against  her  breast,  praying  in  an 

incomprehensible  murmur  until  the  priest  laid  his  hand  on  her  shoulder  and  said:  "All 

right." 

"I've told a lot of lies," Trinidad said. 

"What else?" 

 

"I've had bad thoughts." 

It  was  the  order  of  her  confession.  She  always  enumerated  the  same  sins  in  a 

general way and always in the same order. That time, however, Father ءngel couldn't resist 

the urge to dig deeper. 

"For example," he said. 

"I don't know." Trinidad hesitated. "Sometimes people get bad thoughts." 

Father ءngel stood up. 

"Did you ever get into your head the idea of taking your life?" 

"Holy  Mary,  Mother  of  God,"  Trinidad  exclaimed  without  raising  her  head, 

pounding  on  the  table  leg  with  her  knuckles  at  the  same  time.  Then  she  answered:  "No, 

Father." 

Father ءngel  made  her lift her  head, and  he  noticed, with a  feeling of desolation, 

that the girl's eyes were beginning to fill with tears. 

"You mean that the arsenic is really for the mice?" 

"Yes, Father." 

"Then what are you crying about?" 

Trinidad tried to lower her head, but he held her chin firmly. She burst into tears. 

Father ءngel felt them running through his fingers like warm vinegar. 

"Try to calm yourself," he said. "You still haven't finished your confession." 

He let her go into a silent weeping. When  he felt that she had stopped crying, he 

said softly: "All right, now tell me." 

Trinidad  blew  her  nose  with  her  skirt  and  swallowed  thick  saliva  that  was  salty 

with tears. When she spoke again she'd recovered her strange baritonal voice. 

"My Uncle Ambrosio chases me," she said. 

"How's that?" 

"He wants me to let him spend a night in my bed," Trinidad said. 

"Go on." 

"That's all," Trinidad said. "In God's name, that's all." 

 

"Don't  swear,"  the  priest  admonished  her.  Then  he  asked  with  his  tranquil 

confessor's voice, "Tell me one thing: who are you sleeping with?" 

"With my mama and the others," Trinidad said. "Seven in the same room." 

"What about him?" 

"In the other room, with the men," Trinidad said. 

"Did he ever go into your room?" 

Trinidad denied it with her head. 

"Tell me the truth," Father ءngel insisted. "Come on, don't be afraid: didn't he ever 

try to get into your bed?" 

"Once." 

"How did that happen?" 

"I don't know," Trinidad said. "When I woke up I felt him inside under the netting, 

all quiet, telling me he didn't want to do anything to me, but that he wanted to sleep with me 

because he was afraid of the roosters." 

"What roosters?" 

"I don't know," Trinidad said. "That's what he told me." 

"And what did you tell him?" 

"That if he didn't leave I'd holler and wake everybody up." 

"And what did he do?" 

"Cلstula woke up and asked me what was going on, and I said nothing, that I must 

have been dreaming, and then  he stayed very quiet, like a dead  man, and  I almost didn't 

notice it when he got out from under the netting." 

"He had his clothes on," the priest said in an affirmative way. 

"He was the way he is when he sleeps," Trinidad said. "Only in his pants." 

"He didn't try to touch you." 

"No, Father." 

"Tell me the truth." 

"It's true, Father," Trinidad insisted. "In God's name." 

 

Father  ءngel  raised  her  head  again  and  looked  into  her  moist  eyes  and  their  sad 

glow. 

"Why did you hide it from me?" 

"I was scared." 

"Scared of what?" 

"I don't know, Father." 

He placed his hand on  her shoulder and  gave her some lengthy advice. Trinidad 

nodded approvingly. When they came to the end, he began to pray with her in a very low 

voice: "Our  Lord Jesus Christ,  true God and true  Man..." He was praying deeply, with a 

certain terror, making, in the course of his prayers, a mental recounting of his life as far as 

memory would permit. At  the  moment of giving absolution, a sense of disaster had come 

over his spirit. 

The  mayor  pushed  open  the  door,  shouting:  "Judge."  Judge  Arcadio's  wife 

appeared in the bedroom door, drying her hands on her skirt. 

"He hasn't been home for two nights," she said. 

"Oh,  hell,"  the  mayor  said.  "Yesterday  he  didn't  show  up  at  the  office.  I  was 

looking  for him everywhere on an urgent  matter and  no one could tell me anything about 

him. Don't you have any idea where he might be?" 

"He must be with the whores." 

The  mayor  left  without  closing  the  door.  He  went  into  the  poolroom,  where  the 

jukebox  was  grinding  out  a  sentimental  song  at  full  volume,  and  he  went  directly  to  the 

back room, shouting: "Judge." Don Roque, the owner, interrupted the operation of pouring 

bottles of rum into a demijohn. "He's not  here,  Lieutenant,"  he shouted.  The  mayor went 

behind the partition. Croups of men were playing cards. Nobody had seen Judge Arcadio. 

"God damn it," the  mayor said. "Everybody in this  town  knows what everybody 

else is doing and now that I need the judge, nobody knows where he's off to." 

"Ask the one who puts up the lampoons," Don Roque said. 

"Don't bug me with those pieces of paper," the mayor said. 

 

Judge Arcadio wasn't at his office either. It was nine o'clock, but the secretary of 

the court was already taking a nap on the porch. The mayor went to the police barracks, had 

three policemen get dressed, and sent them off to look for Judge Arcadio at the dance hall 

and in  the rooms of the  three clandestine women  known  to everybody. Then  he went out 

onto the street, following no determined direction. At the barbershop, his legs spread apart 

in the chair and with a hot towel wrapped around his face, Judge Arcadio was sitting. 

"God damn it, Judge," he shouted, "I've been looking for you for two days." 

The barber removed the towel and the mayor saw a pair of bleary eyes and a chin 

shadowed by a three-day beard. 

"You get lost while your wife is giving birth," he said. 

Judge Arcadio leaped from the chair. 

"Shit." 

The mayor laughed noisily, pushing him back into the chair. "Don't be a fool," he 

said. "I've been looking for you for a different reason." Judge Arcadio stretched out again, 

with his eyes closed. 

"Finish that up and come to the office," the mayor said. "I'll wait for you." 

He sat down on a step. 

"Where in hell were you?" 

"Around," the judge said. 

The mayor didn't patronize the barbershop. At one time he'd seen the sign nailed to 

the wall: Talking Politics Prohibited, but it had seemed natural to him. That time, however, 

it caught his attention. 

"Guardiola," he called. 

The barber cleaned the razor on his pants and remained waiting. 

"What's the matter, Lieutenant?" 

"Who authorized you to put that up?" the mayor asked, pointing to the notice. 

"Experience," said the barber. 

 

The mayor took a stool over to the back of the room and stood on it to remove the 

sign. 

"Here the only one who has the right  to prohibit anything is the  government," he 

said. "We're living in a democracy." 

The barber went back to his work. "No one can stop people from expressing their 

ideas," the mayor went on, tearing up the piece of cardboard. He threw the pieces into the 

wastebasket and went to the stand to wash his hands. 

"So  you  see,  Guardiola,"  Judge  Arcadio  proclaimed,  "what  happens  to  you  for 

being such a toad." 

The  mayor  sought  out  the  barber  in  the  mirror  and  found  him  absorbed  in  his 

work. He didn't lose sight of him while he dried his hands. 

"The difference between before and now," he said, "is that before politicians gave 

the orders and now the government does." 

"You heard him, Guardiola," Judge Arcadio said, his face all daubed with lather. 

"Of course," the barber said. 

On  leaving  he  pushed  Judge  Arcadio  toward  the  office.  Under  the  persistent 

drizzle the streets seemed paved with fresh soap. 

"I always thought that place was a nest of conspirators," the mayor said. 

"They talk," said Judge Arcadio, "but it doesn't go beyond that." 

"That's  precisely  what  makes  me  suspicious,"  the  mayor  replied.  "They  act  too 

tame." 

"In  the  whole  history  of  humanity,"  the  judge  proclaimed,  "there's  never  been  a 

single  barber who  was  a  conspirator.  On  the  other  hand,  there  hasn't  been  a  single  tailor 

who wasn't." 

He didn't let  go of Judge Arcadio's arm  until he sat  him  in the swivel chair. The 

secretary came yawning into the office with a typewritten page. "That's the way," the mayor 

said. "Let's get to work." He pushed back his cap and took the sheet of paper. 

"What's this?" 

 

"It's  for the judge," the secretary said. "It's a list of people who  haven't  had any 

lampoons put up on them." 

The mayor looked at Judge Arcadio with an expression of perplexity. 

"Oh, shit!" he exclaimed. "So you're hung up on that mess too." 

"It's like reading detective stories," the judge apologized. 

The mayor read the list. 

"It's a good piece of information," the secretary explained. "The author has to be 

one of these. Isn't that logical?" 

Judge Arcadio took the sheet away from the mayor. "This one here is such a dumb 

asshole," he said, addressing the mayor. Then he spoke to the secretary: "If I were putting 

up lampoons,  the  first door I'd put one on would be  my own, to  get rid of any suspicion 

about me." And he asked the mayor: "Don't you think so, Lieutenant?" 

"That's the people's mess," the mayor said. "And they're the only ones who know 

how it hangs together. We've got no business getting sweated up over it." 

Judge Arcadio tore up the sheet, made a ball of it, and tossed it into the courtyard. 

"Of course." 

Before the reply, the mayor had already forgotten the incident. He put the palms of 

his  hands on  the desk and said: "Well, the  mess I want to look  up in  your books is this: 

Because of the floods, the people in the lower part of town have brought their houses to the 

lots located behind the cemetery, which are my property. What must I do in this case?" 

Judge Arcadio smiled. 

"We didn't have to come to the office for that," he said. "It's the simplest thing in 

the world: The town government awards the land to the settlers and pays the corresponding 

indemnification to the person who shows just title to it." 

"I've got the documents," the mayor said. 

"Then  there's  nothing  to  do  but  name  some  experts  to  make  the  appraisal,"  the 

judge said. "The town government pays." 

"Who names them?" 

 

"You can name them yourself." 

The mayor walked to the door, adjusting the holster of his revolver. Watching him 

getting  ready  to  leave,  Judge  Arcadio  thought  that  life  is  nothing  but  a  continuous 

succession of opportunities for survival. 

"There's no reason to get nervous over such a simple matter." He smiled. 

"I'm not nervous," the mayor said seriously. "But that doesn't stop it from being a 

mess." 

"Of course, first you have to name a surrogate," the secretary put in. 

The mayor turned to the judge. 

"Is that true?" 

"In  a  state  of  siege,  it's  not  absolutely  indispensable,"  the  judge  said.  "But  of 

course,  your  position  would  be  cleaner  if  a  surrogate  handled  the  matter,  given  the 

coincidence that you're the owner of the lands in litigation." 

"Then we'll have to appoint him," the mayor said. 

Mr. Benjamيn shifted  his foot on  the boardwalk without  taking  his eyes off the 

buzzards  that  were  fighting  over  some  entrails  in  the  street.  He  watched  the  difficult 

movements of the creatures, ruffed and ceremonious as if they were performing an ancient 

dance,  and  he  admired  the  representative  fidelity  of  men  who  dress  up  as  buzzards  on 

Quinquagesima Sunday. The boy sitting at  his feet daubed the other shoe with zinc oxide 

and rapped on the box again to order a change of feet on the boardwalk. 

Mr. Benjamيn, who in other days had lived by writing briefs, was never in a hurry 

for anything. The speed of  time was imperceptible in that store where penny by penny it 

had been eaten up until it had been reduced to a gallon of oil and a bundle of tallow candles. 

"Even though it rains it stays hot," the boy said. 

Mr. Benjamيn didn't agree. He wore spotless linen. The boy's back, on the other 

hand, was soaked in sweat. 

"Heat is a  mental question," Mr. Benjamيn said. "The whole thing is not to pay 

any attention to it." 

 

The boy  made  no comment. He  gave another rap on the box and a  moment later 

the job was done. Inside his gloomy store with its empty shelves, Mr. Benjamيn put on his 

jacket. Then  he put on a woven straw hat, crossed the street, protecting  himself from the 

rain with an umbrella, and knocked at the window of the house across the way. A girl with 

intensely black hair and very pale skin appeared in the half-open door. 

"Good morning, Mina," Mr. Benjamيn said. "You still haven't had lunch?" 

She said no and opened the window all the way. She was sitting in front of a large 

basket  with  pieces  of  wire  and  colored  paper.  In  her  lap  she  had  a  bali  of  thread,  some 

shears,  and  an  unfinished  bouquet  of  artificial  flowers.  A  record  was  singing  on  the 

gramophone. 

"Would you do me the favor of keeping an eye on the store until I get back?" Mr. 

Benjamيn asked. 

"Will you be long?" 

Mr. Benjamيn was following the record. 

"I'm going to the dentist's," he said. "I'll be back in half an hour." 

"Oh,  fine,"  Mina  said.  "The  blind  woman  doesn't  want  me  to  hang  around  the 

window." 

Mr. Benjamيn stopped listening  to the record. "All the songs today are the  same 

thing," he commented. Mina picked up a finished flower at the end of a long piece of wire 

wrapped  in  green  paper.  She  twirled  it  in  her  fingers,  fascinated  by  the  perfect 

correspondence between the record and the flower. 

"You're a music hater," she said. 

But Mr. Benjamيn had left, walking on tiptoes so as not to scare off the buzzards. 

Mina didn't pick up her work until she saw him knock at the dentist's. 

"To  my way of seeing it," the dentist said, opening the door, "the chameleon has 

his sensibility in his eyes." 

"That's  possible,"  Mr.  Benjamيn  admitted.  "But  what's  that  got  to  do  with 

anything?" 

 

"I  just  heard  on  the  radio  that  blind  chameleons  don't  change  color,"  the  dentist 

said. 

After placing his open umbrella in a corner, Mr. Benjamيn hung his jacket and hat 

on the same nail and got in the chair. The dentist was mixing a pink paste in his mortar. 

"They say a lot of things," Mr. Benjamيn said. 

Not only in that instance, but under any circumstances, he spoke with a mysterious 

inflection. 

"About chameleons?" 

"About everybody." 

The  dentist  approached  the  chair  with  the  finished  paste  to  take  the  impression. 

Mr. Benjamيn  took out  his chipped false teeth, wrapped them in a handkerchief, and put 

them  on  the  glass  shelf  beside  the  chair.  Without  teeth,  with  his  narrow  shoulders  and 

skinny  limbs,  he  had  something  of  the  saint  about  him.  After  adjusting  the  paste  to  the 

palate, the dentist made him close his mouth. 

"That's how it is," he said, looking him in the eyes. "I'm a coward." 

Mr.  Benjamيn  tried  to  find  some  profound  inspiration,  but  the  dentist  held  his 

mouth  shut.  "No,"  he  answered  inside.  "That's  not  it."  He  knew,  like  everyone,  that  the 

dentist  had been the only one sentenced to death who hadn't abandoned his house. They'd 

perforated the walls with shots, had given him twenty-four hours to leave town, but hadn't 

succeeded in breaking him. He'd moved his office into an inner room and without losing his 

control, worked with his revolver in reach until the long months of terror passed. 

While  the  procedure  lasted,  the  dentist  saw  the  same  response,  expressed  in 

different degrees of anguish, appear in Mr. Benjamيn's eyes. But  he  held his mouth shut, 

waiting for the paste to dry. Then he pulled off the impression. 

"I wasn't referring to that," Mr. Benjamيn unburdened himself. "I was referring to 

the lampoons." 

"Oh," the dentist said. "So you're hung up on that too." 

"It's a symptom of social decomposition," Mr. Benjamيn said. 

 

He'd put his false teeth back in and was starting the meticulous process of putting 

on his jacket. 

"It's  a  symptom  that  everything's  known  sooner  or  later,"  the  dentist  said  with 

indifference. He looked at the cloudy sky through the window and proposed: "If you want 

to, you can wait until it stops raining." 

Mr.  Benjamيn  hung  his  umbrella  over  his  arm.  "The  shop's  all  alone,"  he  said, 

observing in turn the heavy cloud loaded with drizzle. He waved goodbye with his hat. 

"And get that idea out of your head, Aurelio," he said from the door. "Nobody has 

the right to think you're a coward because you pulled a molar for the mayor." 

"In that case," the dentist said, "wait a second." 

He went to the door and gave Mr. Benjamيn a folded sheet of paper. 

"Read it and pass it around." 

Mr.  Benjamيn  had  no  need  to  unfold  the  paper  to  know  what  it  was about.  He 

looked at him with his mouth open. 

"Again?" 

The dentist nodded his head and remained at the door until Mr. Benjamيn had left. 

At  twelve  o'clock  his  wife  called  him  to  lunch.  Angela,  his  twenty-year-old 

daughter, was darning socks in the dining room, which was furnished in a simple and poor 

way  with  things  that  seemed  to  have  been  old  from  their  very  origins.  On  the  wooden 

railing that faced the courtyard there was a row of red pots with medicinal plants. 

"Poor little Benjamيn," the dentist said the moment he took his place at the round 

table. "He's hung up on the lampoons." 

"Everybody is," his wife said. 

"The Tovar women are leaving town," Angela put in. 

The mother collected the plates to serve the soup. "They're selling everything in a 

rush," she said. On breathing in  the warm aroma of  the soup,  the dentist felt alien to  his 

wife's worries. 

"They'll be back," he said. "Shame has a short memory." 

 

Blowing  on  his  spoon  before  drinking  his  soup,  he  waited  for  his  daughter's 

comment.  She  was  a  girl  of  somewhat  arid  aspect,  like  him,  whose  look  nevertheless 

exhaled a strange vivacity. But she didn't respond to  his expectation. She talked about the 

circus. She said there was a man who sawed his wife in half, a  midget who sang with  his 

head  in  a  lion's  mouth,  and  a  trapeze  artist  who  did  a  triple  somersault  over  a  bank  of 

knives. The dentist listened to her, eating in silence. At the end he promised that that night, 

if it didn't rain, they'd all go to the circus. 

In the bedroom, while he was putting up the hammock for his siesta, he could see 

that the promise hadn't changed his wife's mood. She, too, was ready to leave town if they 

put up a lampoon about them. 

The dentist listened to her without surprise. "It would be funny," he said, "if they 

weren't able to get rid of us with bullets, that they could get rid of us with a piece of paper 

stuck  to  the  door."  He  took  off  his  shoes  and  got  into  the  hammock  with  his  socks  on, 

calming her: "But don't you worry: there isn't the slightest danger that they'll put one up." 

"They respect no one," the woman said. 

"That  depends,"  the  dentist  said.  "They  know  that  with  me  the  thing  has  got  a 

different price." 

The woman stretched out on the bed with an air of infinite fatigue. 

"If, that is, the one who's putting them up knew." 

"The one who's putting them up knows," the dentist said. 

The  mayor was accustomed to  go  for days without eating.  He simply forgot.  His 

activity,  feverish  on  occasions,  was  as  irregular  as  the  prolonged  periods  of  idleness  and 

boredom with which he wandered through the town without any aim or shut himself up in 

his armored office, unaware of the passage of time. Always alone, always a little adrift, he 

had no special interests, nor could he remember any time when he was governed by regular 

habits. Impelled only by an irresistible haste, he would appear at the hotel at any hour and 

eat whatever they served him. 

 

That  day  he  had  lunch  with  Judge  Arcadio.  They  spent  the  whole  afternoon 

together until the sale of the lots was legalized. The experts did their duty. The surrogate, 

named on an interim basis, held his post for two hours, A little after four, as they went into 

the poolroom, both seemed to be coming back from a painful invasion by the future. 

"So we're done with it," the mayor said, rubbing his hands. 

Judge Arcadio didn't pay any attention to him. The mayor saw him feeling around 

on the counter and gave him an analgesic. 

"A glass of water," he ordered Don Roque. 

"A cold beer," Judge Arcadio corrected him, leaning his forehead on the counter. 

"Or  a  cold  beer,"  the  mayor  amended,  putting  the  money  on  the  counter.  "You 

earned it working like a man." 

After  drinking  the  beer,  Judge  Arcadio  rubbed  his  scalp  with  his  fingers.  The 

establishment was in a festive mood, waiting excitedly for the circus parade. 

The mayor watched it from the poolroom, shaken by the coppers and brasses of the 

band.  A  girl with a silvery costume passed first on a  midget elephant with  malanga ears. 

Then  the clowns and trapeze artists passed. It  had cleared completely and the last rays of 

the sun were beginning to warm up the well-scrubbed afternoon. When the music stopped 

so the man on stilts could read the proclamation, the whole town seemed to rise up from the 

earth in a miraculous silence. 

Father Angel, who watched the parade from his study, kept time to the music with 

his head. That  feeling of well-being brought back  from childhood stayed with  him during 

his  meal  and  then  into  the  early  part  of  the  evening,  until  he  stopped  his  surveillance  of 

entry into the movie and found himself alone in his bedroom. After praying, he remained in 

a grumbling ecstasy in the wicker rocking chair, not realizing when it struck nine or when 

the loudspeaker from the movie turned off and there remained in its stead the note of a toad. 

From there he went to his desk to write a summons to the mayor. 

In one of the seats of honor at the circus, which he occupied at the insistence of the 

impresario,  the  mayor  witnessed  the  opening  number  by  the  trapeze  artists  and  an 

 

appearance of  the clowns. Then  Casandra appeared, dressed in black velvet and with  her 

eyes blindfolded, offering to guess the thoughts of the public. The mayor fled. He made his 

routine  rounds  through  the  town  and  at  ten  o'clock  went  to  the  police  barracks.  There, 

waiting  for  him  on  notepaper  in  very  meticulous  handwriting,  was  the  call  from  Father 

Angel. The formality of the request alarmed him. 

Father ءngel was beginning to get undressed when the mayor knocked on the door. 

"Golly," the curate said. "I didn't expect  you so soon." The  mayor took off his cap before 

entering. 

"I like to answer my mail." He smiled. 

He  tossed  his  cap,  making  it  spin  like  a  disk,  onto  the  wicker  rocking  chair.  In 

earthen crocks were several bottles of soda put to cool in the water from the tub. Father 

ءngel took one out. 

"Would you like a lemonade?" 

The mayor accepted. 

"I bothered you," the priest said, getting directly to the point, "to tell you about my 

worries concerning your indifference to the lampoons." 

He  said  it  in  such  a  way  that  it  might  have  been  interpreted  as  a  joke,  but  the 

mayor took it literally. He wondered, perplexed, how concern over the lampoons had been 

able to bring Father ءngel to that point. 

"It's strange, Father, that you're hung up on that too." 

Father  Angel,  as  he  searched  in  the  drawers  for  a  bottle-opener:  "It's  not  the 

lampoons as such  that worry  me,"  he said, a little confused, not knowing what to do with 

the bottle. "What worries me is--let's put it this way: a certain state of injustice that's in all 

this." 

The mayor took the bottle from him and opened it on the buckle of his boot with a 

left-handed skill that drew Father Angel's attention. He licked the overflowing foam on the 

neck of the bottle. 

 

"There's  a  secret  life,"  he  started  to  say,  without  managing  any  conclusion. 

"Seriously, Father, I don't see what can be done." 

The  priest  sat  down  at  his  desk.  "You  ought  to  know,"  he  said.  "After  all,  it's 

nothing new to you." He covered the room with a vague look and said in a different tone: 

"It would be a matter of doing something before Sunday." 

"Today's Thursday." The mayor was precise. 

"I'm aware of the time,"  the priest replied. And  he added with a hidden impulse, 

"But maybe it's not too late for you to fulfill your duties." 

The mayor tried to twist the neck of the bottle. Father ءngel watched him go from 

one side of the room to the other, serious and slim, with no sign of physical aging, and he 

felt a definite sense of inferiority. 

"As you can see," he stated, "it's not a question of anything exceptional." 

It  struck  eleven  in  the  belfry.  The  mayor  waited  until  the  last  resonance  had 

dissolved and then he leaned toward the priest, his hands resting on the desk. His face had 

the same repressed anxiety that his voice was to reveal. 

"Look at one thing, Father," he began. "The town is calm, the people are beginning 

to have confidence in the authorities. Any show of force at this time would be too big a risk 

for something of such small importance." 

Father  ءngel  approved  with  his  head.  He  tried  to  explain:  "I'm  referring,  in  a 

general way, to certain means of authority." 

"In  any  case,"  the  mayor  went  on  without  changing  his  stance,  "I'm  taking  the 

circumstances  into  consideration.  You  know,  I  have  six  policemen  here  locked  up  in  the 

barracks,  drawing  a  salary  without  doing  anything.  I  haven't  been  able  to  get  them 

replaced." 

"I know that," Father ءngel said. "I'm not blaming you for anything." 

"Actually,"  the  mayor  went  on  vehemently,  indifferent  to  interruptions,  "It's  no 

secret to anybody that three of them are common criminals, released from jail and disguised 

 

as policemen. The way things are, I'm not going to run the risk of putting them out on the 

streets hunting ghosts." 

Father ءngel opened his arms. 

"Of course, of course," he acknowledged decisively. "That, naturally, is out of the 

question. But why not have recourse, for example, to the good citizens?" 

The mayor stretched, drinking from the bottle with listless swallows. His chest and 

back were soaked in sweat. He said: "The good citizens, as you call them, are dying with 

laughter over the lampoons." 

"Not all of them." 

"Besides, it's no good alarming people over something that in the long run isn't that 

important. Frankly, Father," he ended  good-humoredly, "until tonight it hadn't occurred to 

me to think that you and I would have anything to do with this mess." 

Father ءngel assumed a maternal attitude. "Up to a certain point, yes," he replied, 

and began a laborious justification employing ripened paragraphs from  the sermon  he had 

been ordering mentally since the day before at lunch with the widow Asيs. 

"It's  a  question,  if  one  might  say  so"--he  came  to  the  high  point--"of  a  case  of 

terrorism in the moral order." 

The  mayor gave an open smile. "Fine, fine,"  he almost interrupted  him. "And it's 

not a case of putting philosophy onto the pieces of paper, Father." Leaving the  unfinished 

bottle on the desk, he acceded in his most agreeable manner: "If you put things to me this 

way, we'll have to see what can be done." 

Father ءngel thanked him. It wasn't at all pleasant, as he revealed, to go up into the 

pulpit on Sunday with a worry like  that.  The  mayor  had tried  to  understand  him. But  he 

realized that it was getting late and he was making a night owl out of the curate. 

 

CHAPTER 7 

THE DRUM  ROLL reappeared like a specter out of the past. It burst  forth in front of the 

poolroom at ten o'clock in the morning and held the town balancing on the very center of its 

gravity  until  the  three  energetic  warnings  were  drummed  at  the  end  and  anxiety  was 

reestablished. 

"Death!"  exclaimed  the  widow  Montiel,  seeing  doors  and  windows  open  and 

people pour out into the square from everywhere. "Death has come!" 

Having recovered from her initial impression, she opened the balcony curtains and 

observed the tumult around the policeman who was preparing to read the decree. There was 

in  the  square  a  silence  too  great  for  the  voice  of  the  crier.  In  spite  of  the  attention  with 

which she tried to listen, the widow Montiel was only able to understand two words. 

Nobody in the house could tell her what it was about. 

The decree had been read with the same authoritarian ritual as always; a new order 

reigned  in  the  world  and  she  could  find  no  one  who  had  understood  it.  The  cook  was 

alarmed at her paleness. 

"What was the decree about?" 

"That's what I'm trying  to  find out, but  nobody  knows anything.  Of course," the 

widow added, "ever since the world has been the world, no decree  has ever brought any 

good." 

Then the cook went out into the street and came back with the details. Starting that 

night and until the causes that motivated it had ceased, a curfew was reestablished. No one 

could go out onto the streets after eight o'clock and until five in the morning without a pass 

signed and stamped by the mayor. The police had orders to call Halt three times at anyone 

they found on the street and if they were not obeyed, they had orders to shoot. The mayor 

would organize patrols of civilians, appointed by him, to collaborate with the police in the 

nocturnal vigil. 

Biting her nails, the widow Montiel asked what the reasons for the measure were. 

 

"They didn't spell it out in the decree," the cook answered, "but everybody says it's 

the lampoons." 

"My heart told me so," the terrified widow said. "Death is feeding on this town." 

She sent for Mr. Carmichael. Obeying a force more ancient and deep-rooted than 

an impulse, she ordered taken  from the storeroom and brought  to the bedroom the leather 

trunk with copper rivets that José Montiel had bought for his only trip, one year before he 

died. Out of  the closet she took some clothing,  underwear, and shoes, and put everything 

neatly in the bottom. As she did it, she began to get the feeling of absolute repose that she 

had dreamed of so many times, imagining herself far away from that town and that house, 

in a room with a stove and a small terrace with boxes where she grew oregano, where only 

she had the right to remember José Montiel, and where her only worry would be to wait for 

Monday afternoons to read the letters from her daughters. 

She  had  only  put  in  clothing  that  was  indispensable;  the  leather  case  with  the 

scissors, the adhesive tape, and the little bottle of iodine and sewing  things; and then the 

shoe box with her rosary and prayerbooks, and she was already tormented by the idea that 

she was taking  more things than God could pardon her for. Then she put  the piaster Saint 

Raphael into a stocking, arranged it carefully among her clothes, and locked the trunk. 

When Mr. Carmichael arrived he found her wearing  her most  modest attire. That 

day, like a promissory sign,  Mr. Carmichael wasn't carrying  his umbrella. But  the widow 

didn't  notice.  From  her  pocket  she  took  out  all  the  keys  of  the  house,  each  with  its 

identification  typed  on  a  piece  of  cardboard,  and  gave  them  to  him,  saying:  "Into  your 

hands I place the sinful world of José Montiel. Do with it whatever you feel like doing." 

Mr. Carmichael had feared that moment for a long time. 

"You  mean,"  he struggled  to say. "that  you want  to  go off somewhere while all 

these things are happening." 

The widow answered him with a calm voice, but quite decisively: "I'm going away 

forever." 

 

Mr. Carmichael, without showing his alarm, gave her a synthesis of the situation. 

José Montiel's estate had not been settled. Many of the possessions acquired in any old way 

and without time to observe formalities had an uncertain legal status. Until order could be 

put into  that chaotic fortune, of which José Montiel himself  didn't even  have  the vaguest 

notion in his last years, it would be impossible to settle the inheritance. The oldest son, in 

his consular post in Germany, and her two daughers, fascinated by the delirious fleshpots of 

Paris, would have  to return or  give someone power of attorney in order to evaluate  their 

rights. Until then nothing could be sold. 

The momentary illumination of the labyrinth where she had been lost for two years 

didn't move the widow Montiel that time. 

"It  doesn't  matter,"  she  insisted.  "My  children  are  happy  in  Europe  and  want 

nothing  to  do  with  this  country  of  savages,  as  they  call it.  If  you  want,  Mr.  Carmichael, 

make a single bundle out of everything you find in this house and throw it to the hogs." 

Mr. Carmichael didn't contradict  her. With  the pretense that, in any case, certain 

things had to be prepared for the trip, he went for the doctor. 

"Now we'll see what your patriotism is made of, Guardiola." 

The barber and the group of men chatting in the barbershop recognized the mayor 

before they saw  him at  the door. "And  you people  too,"  he went on, pointing  to  the  two 

youngest. "Tonight  you'll have the rifles you've wanted so  much; let's see if you're rotten 

enough to turn them against us." It was impossible to mistake the cordial tone of his words. 

"A broom would be better," the barber answered. "For hunting witches there's no 

better rifle than a broom." 

He didn't even look at him. He was shaving  the neck of  the first customer of the 

morning,  and  he  wasn't  taking  the  mayor  seriously.  Only  when  he  saw  him  checking  on 

who  in  the  group  were  reservists  and  could  therefore  handle  a  rifle  did  the  barber 

understand that, indeed, he was one of the chosen. 

"Is it true, Lieutenant, that you're going to involve us in this mess?" he asked. 

 

"Oh, shit," the mayor answered. "You spend your lives whispering for a rifle and 

now that you've got one, you can't believe it." 

He stopped in front of the barber, from where he could dominate the whole group 

in the mirror. "Seriously," he said, shifting to an authoritarian tone. "This afternoon at six, 

first-class reservists will report to the barracks." The barber faced him through the mirror. 

"What if I come down with pneumonia?" he asked. 

"We'll cure you in jail," the mayor answered. 

The phonograph in the poolroom was twisting out a sentimental bolero. The place 

was empty, but on some tables there were bottles and half-finished glasses. 

"Now,  for  sure,"  Don  Roque  said,  seeing  the  mayor  enter,  "it  really  is  a  mess. 

We'll have to close at seven." 

The mayor went straight to the back of the room, where the card tables were also 

deserted. He opened the door to the toilet, looked into the storeroom, and then came back to 

the bar. Passing by the pool table, he unexpectedly lifted the cloth  that covered it, saying: 

"All right, stop being jackasses." 

Two boys came out from under the table, shaking the dust off their pants. One of 

them  was  pale.  The  other,  younger,  had  his  ears  all red.  The  mayor  pushed  them  gently 

toward the tables at the entrance. 

"So you already know," he told them. "Six o'clock at the barracks." 

Don Roque stayed behind the counter. 

"With this mess," he said, "a person will have to turn to smuggling." 

"It's just for two or three days," the mayor said. 

The  manager of  the  movie theater caught  up to  him on  the corner. "This is all I 

needed," he shouted. "After twelve bells, one bugle." The mayor patted him on the shoulder 

and tried to continue on. 

"I'm going to expropriate you," he said. 

"You can't," the manager said. "The movies aren't a public service." 

 

"In a state of siege,"  the  mayor said, "even  the  movies can be declared a public 

service." 

Only then did he stop smiling. He ran up the barracks stairs two steps at a time and 

when he got to the second floor he opened his arms and laughed again. 

"Shit!" he exclaimed. "You too?" 

Collapsed in a folding chair, with the insouciance of an Oriental monarch, was the 

circus impresario. He was ecstatically smoking a sea dog's pipe. As if it were he who was in 

his own home, he signaled the mayor to sit down. 

"Let's talk business, Lieutenant." 

The mayor pulled over a chair and sat down opposite him. Holding; the pipe in the 

hand paved with colored stones, the impresario made an enigmatic sign to him. 

"Can we speak with absolute frankness?" 

The mayor nodded that he could. 

"I  knew  it  yesterday  when  I  saw  you  shaving,"  the  impresario  said.  "Well--I'm 

accustomed to knowing people, and [ know that this curfew, for you..." 

The mayor was examining him with a definite aim at amusement. 

"For  me,  on  the  other  hand,  having  paid  for  the  installation  and  having  to  feed 

seventeen people and nine animals, it's simply a disaster." 

"So?" 

"I propose," the impresario replied, "that you set the curfew for eleven o'clock and 

we'll split the profits from the evening performance." 

The mayor kept on smiling, without changing his position in the chair. 

"I suppose," he said, "that it wasn't hard for you to find someone in town who said 

I'm a thief." 

"It's a legitimate business deal," the impresario protested. 

He didn't notice at what moment the mayor took on a serious expression. 

"We'll talk about it Monday," the lieutenant said in an imprecise way. 

 

"By Monday I'll have hocked my very hide," the impresario replied. "We're oh so 

poor." 

The  mayor took  him to  the stairs, patting  him softly on  the shoulder. "You don't 

have to tell me," he said. "I know all about the business." Once by the stairs, he said in a 

consoling tone: "Send Casandra to me tonight." 

The  impresario  tried  to  turn  around,  but  the  hand  on  his  shoulder  exercised  a 

decided pressure. 

"Of course," he said. "That's deducted." 

"Send her," the mayor insisted, "and we'll talk tomorrow." 

Mr. Benjamيn pushed the screen door with the tips of his fingers, but he didn't go 

into the house. He exclaimed with a secret exasperation: "The windows, Nora." 

Nora Jacob--mature and large--with her hair cut like a man's, was lying in front of 

the electric fan in the half-dark living room. She was waiting for Mr. Benjamيn for lunch. 

On  hearing the call, she  got  up laboriously and opened the  four windows to the street. A 

gush of  heat entered the room,  tiled with the same angular peacock indefinitely repeated, 

and its furniture covered with flowered cloth. Every detail bespoke a poor luxury. 

"What's true," she asked, "in what people are saying?" 

"They're saying so many things." 

"About the widow Montiel." Nora Jacob was more precise. "They're going around 

saying that she's gone crazy." 

"I think she's been crazy for some time now," Mr. Benjamيn said. And he added 

with a certain disillusion, "That's how it is: this morning she tried to jump off her balcony." 

The  table, completely visible from  the street, was set with a place at either end. 

"God's  punishment,"  said  Nora  Jacob,  clapping  her  hands  for  lunch  to  be  served.  She 

brought the fan into the dining room. 

"The house has been full of people ever since this morning," Mr. Benjamيn said. 

"It's a good chance to see the inside," replied Nora Jacob. 

 

A black girl, her head full of red bows, brought the steaming soup to the table. The 

smell  of  chicken  invaded  the  dining  room  and  the  temperature  became  intolerable.  Mr. 

Benjamيn tucked his napkin into  his collar, saying: "Your health." He tried to drink from 

the scalding spoon. 

"Blow  on  it,  don't  be  a  fool,"  she  said  impatiently.  "Besides,  you've  got  to  take 

your jacket off. Your scruples about not coming into the house with the windows closed is 

going to make us die of the heat." 

"It's more indispensable than ever now," he said. "No one will be able to say that 

he hasn't seen from the street every move I make when I'm in your house." 

She opened  up  her splendid orthopedic smile, with sealing-wax  gums. "Don't be 

ridiculous,"  she  exclaimed.  "As  far  as  I'm  concerned,  they  can  say  whatever  they  want." 

When she was able to drink the soup, she went on talking during the pauses. 

"I  might  be  worried,  true,  about  what  they'd  say  about  Monica,"  she  concluded, 

referring  to  her  fifteen-year-old  daughter,  who  hadn't  been  home  for  vacation  ever  since 

she'd  gone  away  to  school  for  the  first  time.  "But  they  can't  say  anything  about  me  that 

everybody doesn't already know." 

Mr. Benjamيn didn't give her his usual look of disapproval. They drank their soup 

in silence, separated by the six feet of the table, the shortest distance he would ever permit, 

especially  in  public.  When  she  had  been  away  at  school,  twenty  years  before,  he  would 

write her long and conventional letters, which she answered with passionate notes. During a 

vacation, at a picnic, Nestor Jacob, completely drunk, had dragged her into a corner of the 

corral by the hair and declared to her without alternatives: "If you don't marry me I'll shoot 

you." They got married at the end of her vacation. Ten years later they'd separated. 

"In  any  case,"  Mr.  Benjamيn  said,  "there's  no  reason  to  stimulate  people's 

imaginations with closed doors." 

He stood  up when  he'd finished  his coffee. "I'm  going,"  he said. "Mina  must be 

desperate." From the door, putting on his hat, he exclaimed: "This house is burning up." 

"That's what I've been telling you," she said. 

 

She waited until from the last window she saw him take  his leave with a kind of 

blessing. Then she brought the  fan into  the bedroom, closed the door, and  got completely 

undressed. Finally, as on every day after lunch, she went into the adjoining bathroom and 

sat on the toilet, alone with her secret. 

Four times a day she saw Nestor Jacob pass by the house. Everybody knew that he 

was  living  with  another  woman,  that  he  had  four  children  by  her,  and  that  he  was 

considered an exemplary father. Several times over the past few years, he had passed by the 

house with the children, but never with the woman. She'd seen him grow thin, old, and pale, 

and  turn into a stranger whose intimacy of past  times seemed inconceivable. Sometimes, 

during  her solitary siestas, she'd desired him again in a pressing way:  not as she saw him 

pass by the house, but as he'd been during the time that preceded Monica's birth, when his 

brief and conventional love had still not made him intolerable to her. 

Judge Arcadio slept until noon. So he didn't  hear about the decree until he got to 

his office. His secretary, on the other hand, had been alarmed since eight o'clock, when the 

mayor asked him to draw up the document. 

"No  matter what," Judge Arcadio reflected after finding out the details, "it's been 

drawn up in drastic terms. It wasn't necessary." 

"It's the same decree as always." 

"That's  true,"  the  judge  admitted.  "But  things  have  changed,  and  terms  have 

changed too. The people must be frightened." 

Nevertheless, as he discovered later on while playing cards at the poolroom,  fear 

wasn't  the  predominant  feeling.  It  was,  rather,  a  feeling  of  collective  victory  in  the 

confirmation that was in everyone's consciousness: things  hadn't changed. Judge Arcadio 

couldn't draw out the mayor when he left the poolroom. 

"So the lampoons weren't worth the trouble," he told him. "The people are happy." 

The  mayor  took  him  by  the  arm.  "Nothing's  being  done  against  the  people,"  he 

said.  "It's  a  routine  matter."  Judge  Arcadio  was  in  despair  over  those  ambulatory 

 

conversations.  The  mayor  marched  along  with  a  resolute  step,  as  if  he  were  on  urgent 

business, and then after much walking you realized that he wasn't going anywhere. 

"This  won't  last  for  a  whole  lifetime,"  he  went  on.  "By  Sunday  we'll  have  the 

clown who's behind the lampoons locked up. I don't know why, but I keep thinking that it's 

a woman." 

Judge Arcadio didn't think so. In spite of the negligence with which his secretary 

had  gathered  information,  he'd  come  to  an  overall  conclusion:  the  lampoons  weren't  the 

work of a single person. They didn't seem to follow any set pattern. Some, in the last few 

days, presented a new twist: they were drawings. 

"It  might  not  be  a  man  or  a  woman,"  Judge  Arcadio  concluded.  "It  might  be 

different men and different women, all acting on their own." 

"Don't complicate things for me, Judge," the mayor said. "You ought to know that 

in every mess, even if a lot of people are involved, there's always one who's to blame." 

"Aristotle  said  that,  Lieutenant,"  Judge  Arcadio  replied.  And  added  with 

conviction, "In any case, the measures seem extreme to me. The ones who are putting them 

up will simply wait for the curfew to be over." 

"That doesn't matter," the mayor said. "In the end we have to preserve the principle 

of authority." 

The recruits had begun to gather at the barracks. The small courtyard with its high 

concrete  walls  spattered  with  dry  blood  and  bullet  holes  recalled  the  times  when  there 

weren't  enough  cells  and  prisoners  were  kept  outdoors.  That  afternoon  the  unarmed 

policemen were wandering through the halls in their shorts. 

"Rovira,"  the  mayor  shouted  from  the  door.  "Bring  those  boys  something  to 

drink." 

The policeman began to get dressed. 

"Rum?" he asked. 

"Don't be a fool," the mayor shouted on his way to the armored office. "Ice water." 

The recruits were smoking, sitting around the courtyard. 

 

Judge Arcadio observed them from the railing on the second floor. 

"Are they volunteers?" 

"Fat chance," the mayor said. "I had to drag them out from under their beds, as if 

they were being drafted." 

"Well, they seem to have been recruited by the opposition," he said. 

The heavy steel doors of the office exhaled an icy breath on being opened. "That 

means they're good for a fight," the mayor said, smiling, after he turned on the lights in his 

private fortress. At one end there was an army cot, a glass pitcher and a tumbler on a chair, 

and a chamber pot  under the cot.  Leaning against the bare concrete walls were rifles and 

submachine guns. The room had no ventilation except for the narrow, high peepholes from 

which  one  could  dominate  the  docks  and  the  two  main  streets.  At  the  other  end  was  the 

desk, beside the safe. 

The mayor worked the combination. 

"And that's nothing," he said. "I'm going to give them all rifles." 

The  policeman  came  in  behind  them.  The  mayor  gave  him  a  few  bills,  saying, 

"Bring  each  one  two  packs  of  cigarettes  too."  When  they  were  alone  once  more,  he 

addressed Judge Arcadio again. 

"What do you think of the mess?" 

The judge answered pensively: "A useless risk." 

"People will stand with their mouths open," the mayor said. "I think, besides, that 

these poor fellows won't know what to do with the rifles." 

"They may be confused," the judge admitted, "but that won't last long." 

He made an effort to repress the feeling of emptiness in his stomach. "Be careful, 

Lieutenant," he reflected. "Don't be the one to ruin everything." The mayor took him out of 

the office with an enigmatic gesture. 

"Don't be a damned fool, Judge," he whispered in his ear. "They'll only have blank 

cartridges." 

 

When  they  went  down  to  the  courtyard  the  lights  were  on.  The  recruits  were 

drinking sodas under the dirty light bulbs, against which the horse flies hurled themselves. 

Strolling from one end to the other of the courtyard, where there were still a few puddles of 

stagnant water, the  mayor explained to them in a paternal tone what  their mission for that 

evening consisted of: They would be stationed in pairs on the main corners with orders to 

fire  on  anyone,  man  or  woman,  who  disobeyed  the  three  commands  to  halt.  He 

recommended valor and prudence. After midnight they would be brought food. The mayor 

hoped  that  with  God's  help,  everything  would  come  off  without  any  trouble  and  that  the 

town would  know how to appreciate that effort of the authorities in the interests of social 

order. 

Father ءngel was getting up from the table when eight o'clock struck in the belfry. 

He turned out the courtyard light,  threw the bolt, and  made the sign of the cross over his 

breviary: "In the name of God." In a distant courtyard a curlew sang. Dozing in the cool of 

the porch beside the cages covered with dark cloths, the widow Asيs heard the second toll 

and without opening her eyes asked: "Did Roberto come in yet?" A maid squatting against 

the  doorframe  answered  that  he'd  been  in  bed  since  seven  o'clock.  A  little  while  before, 

Nora Jacob had turned down the volume on the radio and was in ecstasy over some tenuous 

music that seemed to be coming from a clean and comfortable place. A voice too distant to 

seem real shouted a name on the horizon and the dogs began to bark. 

The dentist hadn't finished listening to the news. 

Remembering  that  Angela  was  doing  a  crossword  puzzle  under  the  bulb  in  the 

courtyard, without looking he ordered her: "Close the main door and go finish that in your 

room." His wife awoke, startled. 

Roberto Asيs, who in fact had gone to bed at seven o'clock, got up to look at the 

square through the  half-open window, and  he only saw the dark almond trees and the last 

light that was going out on the widow Montiel's balcony. His wife turned on the night light 

and with a  muffled whisper  made  him  go back  to bed. A solitary dog continued barking 

until after the fifth toll. 

 

In  the  hot  bedroom  piled  high  with  empty  cans  and  dusty  bottles,  Don  Lalo 

Moscote was snoring with  the  newspaper spread out over his belly and  his glasses on  his 

forehead.  His  paralytic  wife,  shaken  by  the  memory  of  other  nights  like  that,  shooed 

mosquitoes  with  a  rag  while  she  mentally  counted  the  hour.  After  the  distant  shouts,  the 

barking of the dogs, and the stealthy running, silence took over. 

"Make  sure  there's  Coramine,"  Dr.  Giraldo  instructed  his  wife,  who  was  putting 

emergency  drugs  into  his  bag  before  going  to  bed.  They  were  both  thinking  about  the 

widow Montiel, rigid as a corpse under the last load of Luminal. Only Don Sabas, after a 

long conversation with Mr. Carmichael, had lost his sense of time. He was still in his office, 

weighing the  next day's breakfast on the scale, when  the seventh bell tolled and  his wife 

came out of the bedroom with her hair in disarray. The river stopped. "On a night like this," 

someone  murmured in  the dark at the instant  the eighth bell tolled, deep, irrevocable, and 

something that had begun to sputter fifteen minutes before went out completely. 

Dr. Giraldo closed the book until the curfew bugle stopped vibrating. His wife put 

the bag on the night table, lay down with her face to the wall, and put out her lamp. 

The doctor opened the book but he didn't read. Both were breathing fitfully, alone 

in a town that the measureless silence had reduced to the dimensions of a bedroom. 

"What are you thinking about?" 

"Nothing," the doctor replied. 

He  didn't  concentrate  any  more  until  eleven  o'clock,  when  he  went  back  to  the 

same page where he'd been when eight began  to strike. He turned down  the corner of the 

page and put the book on  the  table. His wife was sleeping. In other  times  they  had both 

stayed up till dawn, trying to figure out the place and circumstances of the shooting. Several 

times the sound of boots and weapons reached the door of their house and they both waited, 

sitting in bed, for the spray of lead that would knock down the door. Many nights, after they 

had learned  how  to distinguish among  the infinite varieties  of  the  terror, they  had stayed 

awake  with  their  heads  on  a  pillow  stuffed  with  clandestine  fliers  to  be  distributed.  One 

dawn  they  heard  the  same  stealthy  preparations  that  precede  a  serenade,  and  then  the 

 

mayor's weary voice: "Not there. He's not mixed up in anything." Dr. Giraldo turned out the 

lamp and tried to sleep. 

The drizzle started after midnight. The barber and another recruit, stationed on the 

corner  by  the  docks,  abandoned  their  post  and  sought  shelter  under  the  eaves  of  Mr. 

Benjamيn's store. The barber lighted a cigarette and examined the rifle in the light of the 

match. It was a new weapon. 

"It's a madeinusa," he said. 

His companion lighted several matches in search of the brand on  his carbine, but 

he couldn't find it. A gutter by the eaves burst onto the butt of the weapon and produced a 

hollow impact. "What a strange mess," he murmured, drying it with his sleeve. "The two of 

us  here,  each  with  a  rifle,  getting  wet."  In  the  extinguished  town  no  sounds  could  be 

perceived other than that of the water from the eaves. 

"There are nine of  us,"  the barber said. "Seven of them, counting  the  mayor, but 

three of them locked up in the barracks." 

"A while back I was thinking the same thing," the other one said. 

The  mayor's  flashlight  made  them  brutally  visible,  crouched  against  the  wall, 

trying to protect  their weapons from  the drops that were bursting on  their shoes like bird 

shot. They recognized him when he put out the light and came in under the eaves. He was 

wearing a trench coat and had a submachine gun slung over his shoulder. A policeman was 

with  him.  After  looking  at  his  watch,  which  he  wore  on  his  right  wrist,  he  ordered  the 

policeman: "Go to the barracks and see what's happened to the food." 

With the same energy that he would have given a battle command, the policeman 

disappeared in the rain. Then the mayor sat down on the ground beside the recruits. 

"Any messes?" he asked. 

"Nothing," answered the barber. 

The other man offered the mayor a cigarette before lighting his. The mayor turned 

it down. 

"How long are you going to keep us at this, Lieutenant?" 

 

"I  don't  know,"  the  mayor  said.  "For  now,  until  curfew  is  over.  We'll  see  what 

happens tomorrow." 

"Until five o'clock!" the barber exclaimed. 

"Oh,  no,"  the  other  one  said.  "Me,  who's  been  on  his  feet  since  four  in  the 

morning." 

A dogfight reached them through the murmur of the rain. The mayor waited until 

the tumult was over and there was only one solitary bark.  He turned to  the recruit with a 

depressed air. 

"Don't tell me; I've spent half my life in this mess,"  he said. "I'm collapsing from 

lack of sleep." 

"For  no  reason,"  the  barber  said,  "This  hasn't  got  any  head  or  tail  to  it.  It's  like 

something women do." 

"I'm beginning to think the same thing," the mayor sighed. 

The policeman returned to inform them that they were waiting for the rain to stop 

to give out the food. Then he delivered another message: a woman, caught without a pass, 

was waiting for the mayor at the barracks. 

It was Casandra. She was sleeping in the folding chair, wrapped in a rubber cape in 

the small room lighted by the mournful bulb on the balcony. The mayor tweaked her nose. 

She gave a moan, shuddered in a start of desperation, and opened her eyes. 

"I was dreaming," she said. 

The mayor turned on the light in the room. Protecting her eyes with her hands, the 

woman  twisted,  grumbling,  and  for  an  instant  he  suffered  her  silver-colored  nails  and 

shaved armpits. 

"You're a fine one," she said. "I've been here since eleven o'clock." 

"I expected to see you at the room," the mayor apologized. 

"I didn't have a pass." 

Her  hair,  copper-colored  two  nights  before,  was  silver  gray  now.  "I  forgot 

completely." The mayor smiled, and after hanging up his raincoat, he took a seat beside her. 

 

"I hope they haven't thought that you're the one who's putting up the papers." The woman 

had recovered her relaxed manner. 

"I wish they had," she replied. "I adore strong emotions." 

Suddenly the mayor seemed lost in the room. With a defenseless air, cracking his 

knuckles, he murmured: "You have to do me a favor." She scrutinized him. 

"Just between the two of us," the mayor went on, "I want you to deal the cards to 

see if it's possible to find out who's responsible for this mess." 

She turned her head away. "I understand," she said after a brief silence. The mayor 

urged her: "I'm doing it for you people more than anything." 

She nodded. 

"I've already done it." 

The mayor couldn't hide his anxiety. "It's something very strange," Casandra went 

on  with  calculated  melodrama.  "The  signs  were  so  obvious  that  I  was  frightened  after 

having them on the table." Even her breathing had become affected. 

"Who is it?" 

"It's the whole town and it's nobody." 

 

CHAPTER 8 

THE SONS of the widow Asيs came to  mass on Sunday. They were seven in addition to 

Roberto Asيs. All founded in the same mold: heavy and rough, with something mulish in 

their will for hard work, and docile to their mother with a blind obedience. Roberto Asيs, 

the youngest and the only son who had married, had only a lump on the bone of his nose in 

common with  his brothers.  With  his delicate  health and  his conventional ways,  he was a 

kind of consolation prize for the daughter that the widow Asيs had grown tired of waiting 

for. 

In  the  kitchen,  where  the  seven  Asيses  had  unloaded  the  animals,  the  widow 

walked  among  an  outpouring  of  trussed-up  chickens,  vegetables  and  cheeses  and  brown 

sugar  loaves  and  strips  of  salted  meat,  giving  instructions  to  the  servant  girls.  Once  the 

kitchen was cleared, she ordered them to pick out the best of everything for Father Angel. 

The  curate  was  shaving.  From  time  to  time  he  reached  his  hand  out  into  the 

courtyard so he could wet his chin with the drizzle. He was getting ready to finish when two 

barefoot  girls  pushed  open  the  door  without  knocking  and  in  front  of  him  poured  out 

several ripe pineapples, red plantains, sugar loaves, cheese, and a basket of vegetables and 

fresh eggs. 

Father  ءngel  winked  at  them.  "This,"  he  said,  "looks  like  Br'er  Rabbit's  dream." 

The younger of the girls, with her eyes all wide, pointed at him: "Priests shave too!" 

The other one led her to the door. "What did you think?" The curate smiled, and 

added seriously: "We're human too." Then he contemplated the provisions scattered on the 

floor and understood that only the house of Asيs was capable of such prodigality. 

"Tell the boys," he almost shouted, "that God will give it back to them in health." 

Father Angel, who after forty years in the priesthood had not learned to dominate 

the  nervousness  that  precedes  solemn  acts,  put  away  the  instruments  without  finishing 

shaving. Then he picked up the provisions and piled them under the jar rack and went into 

the sacristy, drying his hands on his cassock. 

 

The church was full. In  the two pews closest to the pulpit, donated by  them and 

with their respective names engraved on copper plates, were the Asيses, with mother and 

sister-in-law. When  they reached the church, together for the first time in several months, 

one would  have thought  they were coming on  horseback. Cristobal  Asيs, the eldest, who 

had  arrived  from  the  ranch  a  half  hour  before  and  hadn't  had  time  to  shave,  was  still 

wearing his riding boots and spurs. Seeing that forest giant, the public but never confirmed 

story that César Montero was the secret son of old Adalberto Asيs seemed true. 

In  the  sacristy  Father  ءngel  suffered  a  contretemps:  the  liturgical  ornaments 

weren't in their place. The acolyte found him upset, going through drawers while he carried 

on an obscure argument with himself. 

"Call Trinidad," the priest ordered him, "and ask her where she put the stole." 

He  was  forgetting  that  Trinidad  had  been  ill  since  Saturday.  Most  certainly,  the 

acolyte  thought,  she'd  taken  some  things  home  to  fix.  Father  ءngel  then  put  on  the 

ornaments reserved for funerals. He couldn't manage to concentrate. When he went up into 

the pulpit, impatient and still breathing irregularly, he could see that the arguments that had 

ripened in the days preceding wouldn't  have as much strength of conviction now as in the 

solitude of his room. 

He spoke for ten minutes. Stumbling over his words, surprised by a flock of ideas 

that  didn't  fit  into  the  previous  patterns,  he  spotted  the  widow  Asيs,  surrounded  by  her 

sons.  It  was  as  if  he  had  recognized  them  several  centuries  later  in  some  hazy  family 

photograph.  Only  Rebeca  Asيs,  calming  her  splendid  bust  with  the  sandalwood  fan, 

seemed human and contemporary to him. Father ءngel finished his sermon without referring 

directly to the lampoons. 

The widow Asيs remained rigid for a few short minutes, taking her wedding ring 

off and putting it back on with a secret exasperation, while the mass picked up again. Then 

she crossed herself, stood up, and left the church by the central nave, followed tumultuously 

by her sons. 

 

On  a  morning  like  that,  Dr.  Giraldo  could  understand  the  inner  mechanism  of 

suicide. It was drizzling noiselessly, the troupial was whistling in the house next door, and 

his wife was talking while he brushed his teeth. 

"Sundays are strange," she said, setting the table for breakfast. "It's as if they were 

hung up quartered: they smell of raw animals." 

The doctor put his razor together and began to shave. His eyes were moist and his 

eyelids  puffy.  "You're  not  sleeping  well,"  his  wife  told  him.  And  she  added  with  a  soft 

bitterness:  "One  of  these  Sundays  you're  going  to  wake  up  an  old  man."  She'd  put  on  a 

frayed robe and her head was covered with curlers. 

"Do me a favor," he said. "Shut up." 

She went to the  kitchen, put the coffeepot on the stove, and waited for it to boil, 

hanging first on the whistle of the troupial and a moment later on the sound of the shower. 

Then she went to the bedroom so her husband would find his clothes ready when he came 

out of the bathroom. When she brought the breakfast to the table, she saw that he was ready 

to leave, and he looked a little younger with his khaki pants and sport shirt. 

They ate breakfast in silence. Toward the end  he examined  her with affectionate 

attention. She was drinking her coffee with her head down, a little trembly with resentment. 

"It's my liver," he excused himself. 

"Nothing justifies snapping," she replied without raising her head. 

"I must be drunk," he said. "The liver gets all clogged up with this rain." 

"You always say the same thing," she  made clear, "but you  never do anything. If 

you don't open your eyes," she added, "you'll have to heal thyself." 

He seemed to believe her. "In December," he said, "we'll be two weeks at sea." He 

observed the drizzle through the openings of the wooden  grating  that separated the dining 

room  from  the  courtyard,  saddened  by  the  persistence  of  October,  and  added:  "Then,  at 

least for  four  months,  there won't be any Sundays like  this one." She piled  up  the plates 

before taking them into the kitchen. When she came back to the dining room she found him 

with his straw hat on, getting his bag ready. 

 

"So the widow Asيs came out of church again," he said. 

His wife had told him before he started brushing his teeth, but he hadn't paid any 

attention. 

"They've gone about three times this year," she confirmed. "Evidently they haven't 

found any better way to entertain themselves." 

The doctor bared his rigorous dental system. 

"Rich people are crazy." 

Some  women,  on  the  way  home  from  church,  had  gone  in  to  visit  the  widow 

Montiel.  The  doctor  greeted  the  group  that  remained  in  the  living  room.  A  murmur  of 

laughs  followed  him  to  the  landing.  Before  knocking  on  the  door,  he  realized  that  there 

were other women in the bedroom. Someone told him to come in. 

The widow Montiel was sitting  up,  her hair loose, holding the edge of  the sheet 

against her breast. She had a mirror and a comb in her lap. 

"So you decided to come to the party too," she said to the physician. 

"She's celebrating her fifteenth birthday," said one of the women. 

"Eighteenth,"  the widow Montiel corrected with a sad smile. Lying down in bed 

again, she covered herself up to the neck. "Of course," she added good-humoredly, "no men 

have been invited. Much less you, Doctor; it's bad luck." 

The doctor laid his wet hat on the dresser. "You did well," he said, observing the 

patient with a pensive pleasure. "I've just realized that  I've got nothing to do  here." Then, 

turning to the group, he excused himself: "Will you allow me?" 

When she was alone with him, the widow Montiel took on the bitter expression of 

a  sick  woman  again.  But  the  doctor  didn't  seem  to  notice.  He  continued  speaking  in  the 

same festive tone while he laid out on the night table the things he was taking from his bag. 

"Please, Doctor," the widow begged, "no more injections. I'm like a sieve." 

"Injections"--the doctor smiled--"are the best thing ever invented for the feeding of 

doctors." 

She smiled too. 

 

"Believe me," she said, touching her buttocks through the sheet, "this whole part of 

me is raw. I can't even touch it." 

"Don't touch it," the doctor said. 

Then she smiled openly. 

"Talk seriously, even if only on Sundays, Doctor." 

The physician uncovered her arm to take her blood pressure. 

"My doctor won't let me," he said. "It's bad for the liver." 

While  he  was  taking  her  pressure,  the  widow  observed  the  dial  on  the 

sphygmomanometer with a childish curiosity. "That's the funniest watch I've ever seen," she 

said. The doctor remained intent on the needle until he finished squeezing the ball. 

"It's the only one that tells exactly what time to get up," he said. 

When  he'd  finished  and  was  rolling  up  the  tubes  of  the  sphygmomanometer,  he 

observed the face of the patient minutely. He put a bottle of white pills on the table with the 

indication that she take one every twelve hours. "If you don't want any more injections," he 

said, "there won't be any  more injections. You're in better health than  I am." The widow 

made a gesture of impatience. 

"I never had anything," she said. 

"I believe you," the physician replied, "but we've had to invent something in order 

to justify the bill." 

Ignoring the comment, the widow asked: "Do I have to stay in bed?" 

"On the contrary,"  the doctor said, "I absolutely  forbid it. Go down  to the living 

room and take care of your visitors as you should. Besides," he added with a mischievous 

voice, "there are a lot of things to talk about." 

"Good heavens, Doctor," she exclaimed, "don't be so gossipy. You must be the one 

who's putting up the lampoons." 

Dr. Giraldo reveled in the idea.  On leaving,  he cast a  furtive look at the leather 

trunk with copper rivets in  the corner of the bedroom, ready  for the trip. "And bring  me 

 

something  back,"  he  shouted  from  the  door,  "when  you  return  from  your  trip  around  the 

world." The widow had taken up the patient labor of untangling her hair again. 

"Of course. Doctor." 

She didn't go down to the living room. She stayed in bed until the last visitor had 

left.  Then  she  got  dressed.  Mr.  Carmichael  found  her  eating  by  the  half-opened  balcony 

door. 

She replied to his greeting without taking her eyes off the balcony. "Deep down," 

she said, "I like that woman: she's valiant." Mr. Carmichael also looked toward the house of 

the widow Asيs, where the doors and windows hadn't been opened at eleven o'clock. 

"It has something to do with her nature," he said. "With insides like hers, made for 

males only, she couldn't be any other way." Turning his attention to the widow Montiel, he 

added: "And you're like a rose too." 

She  seemed  to  confirm  it  with  the  freshness  of  her  smile.  "Do  you  know 

something?" she asked. And in the face of Mr. Carmichael's indecision she got ahead of the 

answer: "Dr. Giraldo is convinced that I'm crazy." 

"You don't say!" 

The widow nodded  yes. "It wouldn't surprise  me," she went on, "if  he'd already 

talked  to  you  about  some  way  to  send  me  to  the  insane  asylum."  Mr.  Carmichael  didn't 

know how to untangle himself from the confusion. 

"I haven't been out of the house all morning," he said. 

He  dropped  into  the  soft  leather  easy  chair  placed  beside  the  bed.  The  widow 

remembered  José  Montiel  in  that  chair,  struck  down  by  a  cerebral  congestion  fifteen 

minutes before dying. "In that case," she said, shaking off the bad memory, "you might call 

him this afternoon." And she changed the subject with a lucid smile: "Did you talk to  my 

good friend Sabas?" 

Mr. Carmichael nodded yes. 

In fact, on Friday and Saturday he had taken soundings in the abyss that was Don 

Sabas, trying to find out what his reaction would be if José Montiel's estate were put up for 

 

sale.  Don  Sabas--Mr.  Carmichael  supposed--seemed  ready  to  buy  it.  The  widow listened 

without  showing  any  signs  of  impatience.  If  it  wasn't  next  Wednesday,  it  would  be 

Wednesday of the following week, she admitted with a relaxed firmness. In any event, she 

was ready to leave town before October was over. 

The  mayor  unholstered  his  revolver with  an  instantaneous  movement  of  his  left 

hand. Right down to the last muscle his body was ready to fire, when he awoke completely 

and recognized Judge Arcadio. 

"Shit!" 

Judge Arcadio was petrified. 

"Don't  you  ever  mess  up  like  that  again,"  the  mayor  said,  putting  the  revolver 

away. He fell back into the canvas chair. "My hearing works better when I'm asleep." 

"The door was open," Judge Arcadio said. 

The mayor had forgotten to close it at dawn. He was so tired that he'd dropped into 

the chair and fallen asleep instantly. 

"What time is it?" 

"It's going on twelve," Judge Arcadio said. 

There was still a tremulous chord in his voice. 

"I'm dying for sleep," the mayor said. 

Twisting in a long yawn, he had the impression that time had stopped. In spite of 

his diligence, of his sleepless nights, the lampoons continued. That dawn he'd found a piece 

of paper stuck to the door of his room: Don't waste gunpowder on buzzards, Lieutenant. On 

the street they were saying aloud that the very ones who made up the patrols were posting 

the lampoons  to break  the boredom of  their rounds. The town--the  mayor had  thought--is 

dying with laughter. 

"Shake it off," Judge Arcadio said, "and let's go get something to eat." 

But  he  wasn't  hungry.  He  wanted  to  sleep  another  hour  and  take  a  bath  before 

going out. Judge Arcadio, on the other hand, fresh and clean, was going back home to have 

 

lunch. When he passed by the room, since the door was open, he'd gone in to ask the mayor 

for a pass to be on the streets after the curfew. 

The  lieutenant  said  simply:  "No."  Then,  in  a  paternal  way,  he  justified  himself: 

"It's better for you to be safe at home." 

Judge Arcadio lighted a cigarette. He stood contemplating the flame of the match, 

waiting for the rancor to decline, but he found nothing to say. 

"Don't take it so badly," the  mayor added. "Believe me, I'd like to change places 

with you, going to bed at eight o'clock at night and getting up whenever I felt like it." 

"Of  course,"  said  the  judge.  And  he  added  with  accentuated  irony:  "That's  all  I 

needed: a new daddy at the age of thirty-five." 

"Judge." Judge Arcadio turned toward him and they looked into each other's eyes. 

"I'm not going to give you the pass. Understand?" 

The  judge  bit  his  cigarette  and  began  to  say  something,  but  he  repressed  the 

impulse. The  mayor  heard  him  going. slowly down the stairs.  Suddenly, leaning over,  he 

shouted: "Judge!" 

There was no answer. 

"We're still friends," the mayor shouted. 

He didn't get any answer that time either. 

He remained leaning over, waiting for the reaction of Judge Arcadio, until the door 

closed and he was alone with his memories once more. He made no effort to sleep. He was 

sleepless in the middle of the day, bogged down in a town that remained impenetrable and 

alien,  many  years  after  he  had  taken  charge  of  its  fate.  On  the  dawn  when  he  had 

disembarked furtively with an old cardboard suitcase tied with cord and the order to make 

the town submit at all costs, it was he who'd come to  know terror. His only pretext was a 

letter for an obscure partisan of  the  government, whom  he was to meet  the following day 

sitting in his shorts by the door of a rice bin. With his instructions and the implacable will 

of the  three hired assassins who accompanied him,  the  task  had been accomplished.  That 

afternoon, though, unaware of the invisible cobweb that time had been spinning about him, 

 

he  would  only  have  needed  an  instantaneous  burst  of  vision  to  have  wondered  who  had 

submitted to whom. 

He dreamed with his eyes open by the balcony lashed by the rain until a little after 

four.  Then  he  bathed,  put  on  his  field  uniform,  and  went  down  to  the  hotel  to  have 

breakfast.  Later  he  made  a  routine  inspection  at  the  barracks,  and  suddenly  he  found 

himself standing on a corner with his hands in his pockets and not knowing what to do. 

The  owner  of  the  poolroom  saw  him  enter  at  dusk,  with  his  hands  still  in  his 

pockets.  He  greeted  him  from  the  back  of  the  empty  establishment,  but  the  mayor  didn't 

answer. 

"A bottle of mineral water," he said. 

The bottles made a loud noise as they were shifted about in the cooler. 

"One of these days," the proprietor said, "they're going to have to operate on you 

and they'll find your liver all full of bubbles." 

The  mayor  looked  at  the  glass.  He  took  a  sip,  belched,  and  remained  with  his 

elbows on the bar and  his eyes  fixed on  the  glass, and  he belched again.  The square was 

deserted. 

"Well," the mayor said. "What's the matter?" 

"It's Sunday," the proprietor said. 

"Oh!" 

He put a coin on the table and left without saying  goodbye. On the corner of the 

square,  someone  who  was  walking  as  if  he  were  dragging  an  enormous  tail  told  him 

something  that  he  didn't  understand.  A  moment  later  he  reacted.  In  a  confused  way  he 

understood that something was going on and  he went to the barracks. He bounded  up the 

stairs without paying attention  to the  groups that were forming by  the door. A policeman 

came out to  meet  him.  He  gave him a piece of paper and  he  needed only a  glance to see 

what it was all about. 

"He was handing it out at the cockpit," the policeman said. 

 

The mayor ran down the hall. He opened the first cell and remained with his hand 

on the latch, scrutinizing the shadows until he was able to see: it was a boy of about twenty, 

with a sharp and sallow pockmarked face. He was wearing a baseball cap and glasses with 

broken lenses. 

"What's your name?" 

"Pepe." 

"Pepe what?" 

"Pepe Amador." 

The mayor observed him for a moment and made an effort to remember. The boy 

was sitting on the concrete platform that served the prisoners as a bed. He seemed calm. He 

took off his glasses, cleaned them with his shirt-tail, and squinted at the mayor. 

"Where have we seen each other?" the mayor asked. 

"Around," said Pepe Amador. 

The  mayor didn't step into the cell. He kept looking at the prisoner, pensive, and 

then he started to shut the door. 

"Well, Pepe," he said, "I think you fucked yourself up." 

He turned the key, put it in his pocket, and went to  the waiting room to read and 

reread the clandestine flier. 

He  sat  down  by  the  open  balcony,  slapping  mosquitoes,  while  the  lights  in  the 

deserted streets went on. He knew that sunset peace. At another time, during a sunset like 

that,  he'd  had  the  feeling  of  power  in  its  fullness.  "So  they've  come  back,"  he  said  to 

himself, aloud. They'd come back. As before, they were mimeographed on both sides, and 

they  could  have  been  recognized  anywhere  and  at  any  time  by  the  indefinable  mark  of 

hesitation that clandestinity imprints. 

He  thought  for  a  long  time  in  the  shadows,  folding  and  unfolding  the  piece  of 

paper before making a decision. Finally he put it in his pocket and felt for the keys to the 

cell. "Rovira," he called. 

The man he could trust came out of the darkness. The mayor gave him the keys. 

 

"Take charge of that boy," he said. "Try to convince him to give you the names of 

the ones bringing clandestine propaganda into town. If you can't get them in a nice way," he 

made clear, "try any way you can to get him to talk." 

The policeman reminded him that he was on patrol that night. 

"Forget about it," the  mayor said. "Don't worry about anything  until you  get  new 

orders. And another thing," he added as if obeying an inspiration.  "Send those  men in the 

courtyard away. There won't be any patrols tonight." 

He called to his armored office the three men who on his orders remained inactive 

in the barracks. He  had  them put on the  uniforms  he  kept locked  up in  the closet.  While 

they were doing  that,  he  gathered on  the table the blank cartridges that  he'd issued  to the 

men on patrol on previous nights and took a handful of live ammunition out of the safe. 

"Tonight  you people are going to do  the patrolling,"  he told them, inspecting the 

rifles so that they'd have the best ones. "You don't have to do anything except let the people 

know that you're the ones who are on the street." Once they were all armed, he issued the 

ammunition. He stood in front of them. 

"But listen well to one thing," he warned them. "The first one who does something 

foolish I'll have shot against the courtyard wall." He waited for a reaction that didn't come. 

"Understood?" 

The  three  men--two  Indian-looking,  of  ordinary  appearance,  and  a  blond  with  a 

tendency  toward gigantism and eyes of transparent blue--had listened  to the last words as 

they put bullets into the chambers. They came to attention. 

"Understood, Lieutenant, sir." 

"And something else," the mayor said, changing to an informal tone. "The Asيses 

are  in  town  and  it  wouldn't  be  at  all  surprising  if  you  ran  into  one  of  them,  drunk  and 

looking for some mess to get into. No matter what happens, don't get involved with him." 

Nor did he get the expected reaction that time either. "Understood?" 

"Understood, Lieutenant, sir." 

"Then you all know," the mayor concluded. "Keep your five senses on the alert." 

 

When he closed the church after rosary, which he had moved up an hour because 

of the curfew, Father ءngel  got a whiff of the smell of decay. It was a momentary stench, 

not  enough  to  intrigue  him.  Later  on,  frying  some  slices  of  green  plantain  and  warming 

milk  for  his  meal,  he  found  the  cause  of  the  smell:  Trinidad,  ill  since  Saturday,  hadn't 

removed the dead mice. Then he returned to the church, opened and cleaned out the traps, 

and then went to Mina's, two blocks from the church. 

Toto  Visbal himself opened  the door. In the small dark parlor, where there were 

several leather stools in disorder and prints  hanging on the walls, Mina's  mother and  her 

blind  grandmother were drinking something  hot and aromatic in cups.  Mina was  making 

artificial flowers. 

"It's  been  two  weeks,"  the  blind  woman  said,  "that  we  haven't  seen  you  in  this 

house, Father." 

It was true.  Every afternoon  he'd passed by  the window where  Mina was sitting 

making paper flowers, but he never went in. 

"Time passes without making any noise," he said. And then, making it clear that he 

was in a hurry, he turned to Toto Visbal. "I've come to ask  you to let Mina come and take 

charge of the traps starting tomorrow. Trinidad," he explained to Mina, "has been sick since 

Saturday." 

Toto Visbal gave his consent. 

"It's a wish to lose time," the blind woman put in. "After all's said and done, the 

world is coming to an end this year." 

Mina's  mother  put  a  hand  on  her  knee  as  a  sign  to  be  still.  The  blind  woman 

pushed the hand away. 

"God punishes superstition," the curate said. 

"It's written," the blind woman said. "Blood will run in the streets and there won't 

be any human power capable of stopping it." 

The priest gave her a look of pity: she was very old, extremely pale, and her dead 

eyes seemed to penetrate the secret of things. 

 

"We'll be bathed in blood," Mina mocked. 

Then Father ءngel turned to her. He saw her rise up, with her intensely black hair 

and the same paleness as the blind woman's, from amidst a  confused swirl of ribbons and 

colored paper. She looked like an allegorical vignette at a school pageant. 

"And you," he told her, "working on Sunday." 

"I already told her," the blind woman put in. "Burning ashes will rain down on her 

head." 

"Necessity has the face of a dog." Mina smiled. 

Since the curate was still standing, Toto  Visbal brought over a chair and invited 

him  again  to  sit  down.  He  was  a  fragile  man,  with  startled  movements  because  of  his 

timidity. 

"Thank you just the same." Father ءngel refused. "The curfew will catch me on the 

street." He noticed the deep silence in the town and commented: "It seems later than eight 

o'clock." 

Then he found out: after almost two years of empty cells, Pepe Amador was in jail 

and  the  town  at  the  mercy  of  three  criminals.  People  had  shut  themselves  up  since  six 

o'clock. 

"It's strange." Father ءngel seemed to be talking to himself. "A thing getting out of 

hand like that." 

"Sooner or later it had to happen," said Toto Visbal. "The whole country is patched 

up with cobwebs." 

The priest continued to the door. 

"Haven't you seen the clandestine fliers?" 

Father ءngel stopped, perplexed. 

"Again?" 

"In August," the blind woman put in, "the three days of darkness will begin." 

Mina reached out  to  give her a  flower she'd begun. "Be still," she  told her, "and 

stop that." The blind woman recognized the flower by touch. 

 

"So they've come back," the priest said. 

"About  a  week  ago,"  said  Toto  Visbal.  "Because  there  was  one  here,  without 

anybody's knowing who brought it. You know what it's like." 

The curate nodded. 

"They say  that everything's just  the same as before," Toto  Visbal went on. "The 

government changed, they promised peace and guarantees, and at first everybody believed 

them. But the officials are the same ones." 

"And  it's  true,"  put  in  Mina's  mother.  "Here  we  are  with  the  curfew  again,  and 

those three criminals on the street." 

"But  there's  one  thing  new,"  Toto  Visbal  said.  "Now  they're  saying  that  they're 

organizing guerrilla groups against the government in the interior again." 

"That's all written down," the blind woman said. 

"It's absurd," said the curate, pensive. "We have to recognize that the attitude has 

changed. Or at least," he corrected himself, "it had changed until tonight." 

Hours  later,  lying  awake  in  the  heat  of  his  mosquito  netting,  he  wondered, 

nonetheless, whether in reality time  had passed during  the nineteen  years he'd been in the 

parish. 

Across from  his very  house  he  heard the  noise of  the boots and weapons  that in 

different times  had preceded rifle shots. Except  this time the boots went away, passed by 

again an hour later, and went away once more without any shots being fired. A short while 

after, tormented by the fatigue of sleeplessness and the heat, he realized that the cocks had 

been crowing for some time. 

 

CHAPTER 9 

MATEO Asيs tried to calculate the hour by the location of the roosters. Finally he rose to 

the surface of reality. 

"What time is it?" 

Nora Jacob stretched out her arm in the shadows and picked  up the clock with its 

phosphorescent dial from the night table. The answer, which she still hadn't given, woke her 

up completely. 

"Four-thirty," she said. 

"Shit!" 

Mateo  Asيs  jumped  out  of  bed.  But  the  pain  in  his  head  and  then  the  mineral 

sediment  in  his  mouth  obliged  him  to  moderate  his  drive.  He  felt  with  his  feet  in  the 

darkness for his shoes. 

"Daylight might have caught me," he said. 

"How  nice,"  she  said.  She  turned  on  the  small  lamp  and  recognized  his  knotty 

spine and pale buttocks. "You'd have had to stay shut up here until morning." 

She was completely naked, only covering her sex with an edge of the sheet. Even 

her voice lost its warm impudence when the light was turned on. 

Mateo  Asيs  put  on  his  shoes.  He  was  tall  and  sturdy.  Nora  Jacob,  who  had 

received him occasionally for two years, felt a kind of frustration at the bad luck of having 

in secret a man who seemed to her to be made for a woman to talk about. 

"If you don't watch out you're going to get fat," she said. 

"It's  the  good  life,"  he  replied,  trying  to  hide  his  displeasure.  And  he  added, 

smiling: "I must be pregnant." 

"I wish you were," she said. "If men gave birth, they'd be less inconsiderate." 

Mateo Asيs picked the condom up off the floor with his underdrawers, went to the 

bathroom, and threw it into the toilet. He washed, trying not to breathe deeply: at dawn any 

smell was her smell. When he went back into the room he found her sitting up in bed. 

 

"One of these days," Nora Jacob said, "I'm going to get tired of this hiding and I'm 

going to tell the whole world." 

He didn't look at  her  until  he was completely dressed. She  became aware of her 

firm breasts and without stopping talking she covered herself up to the neck with the sheet. 

"I can't see  the time," she went on, "so let's have breakfast in bed and stay  here 

until afternoon. I'm capable of putting up a lampoon myself." 

He gave a broad laugh. 

"Little old Benjamيn would die," he said. "How's that going?" 

"You can imagine," she said. "Waiting for Nestor Jacob to die." 

She  saw  him  wave  goodbye  from  the  door.  "Try  to  make  it  back  on  Christmas 

Eve,"  she  told  him.  He  promised.  He  tiptoed  across  the  courtyard  and  went  out  into  the 

street through  the  main door. There was an icy dew that just dampened the skin.  A shout 

came up to meet him as he reached the square. 

"Halt!" 

A flashlight was turned on into his eyes. He averted his face. 

"Oh, shit!" the mayor said, invisible behind the light. "Look what we've found. Are 

you coming or going?" 

He  turned  off  the  flashlight  and  Mateo  Asيs  saw  him,  accompanied  by  three 

policemen. His face was fresh and washed and he had the submachine gun slung. 

"Coming," said Mateo Asيs. 

The mayor came forward to look at his watch in the light of the street lamp. There 

were ten minutes left till five. With a signal directed at the policemen, he ordered an end to 

the curfew. He remained in suspension until the end of the bugle call, which put a sad note 

into the dawn. Then he sent the policemen away and accompanied Mateo Asيs across the 

square. 

"That's that," he said. "The mess with the papers is over." 

More than satisfaction, there was weariness in his voice. 

"Did they catch the one who was doing it?" 

 

"Not  yet," the  mayor said. "But  I just  made  the last rounds and I can assure  you 

that today, for the first time, not a single piece of paper will see the light of dawn. It was a 

matter of tying up their pants." 

On  reaching  the  main  door  of  his  house,  Mateo  Asيs  went  ahead  to  tie  up  the 

dogs.  The  servant  women  were  starting  to  move  about  in  the  kitchen.  When  the  mayor 

entered he was greeted by an uproar of chained dogs, which, a moment later, was replaced 

by  the  steps  and  sighs  of  peaceful  animals.  The  widow  Asيs  found  them  sitting  and 

drinking coffee on the stone bench in the kitchen. It had grown light. 

"An early-rising man," the widow said, "a good spouse but a bad husband." 

In spite of her good humor, her face revealed the mortification of an intense night 

vigil. The  mayor answered her  greeting.  He picked  the submachine  gun off  the  floor and 

slung it over his shoulder. 

"Drink all the coffee you want, Lieutenant," the widow said, "but don't bring any 

shotguns into my house." 

"On the contrary." Mateo Asيs smiled. "You should borrow it to go to mass with. 

Don't you think?" 

"I  don't  need  junk  like  that  to  defend  myself,"  the  widow  replied.  "Divine 

Providence is on our side. The Asيses," she added seriously, "were people of God before 

there were priests for many miles around." 

The mayor took his leave. "I've got to get some sleep," he said. "This is no life for 

a Christian." He made his way among the hens and ducks and turkeys who were beginning 

to invade the  house. The widow Asيs shooed the animals away. Mateo Asيs went to  his 

room, bathed, changed clothes, and went out again to saddle up his  mule. His brothers had 

left at dawn. 

The  widow  Asيs  was  taking  care  of  the  cages  when  her  son  appeared  in  the 

courtyard. 

"Remember," she told  him, "it's one thing to look after  your hide and something 

else to know how to keep your distance." 

 

"He  only  came  to  have  a  mug  of  coffee,"  Mateo  Asيs  said.  "We  walked  along 

talking, almost without realizing it." 

He was at the end of the porch, looking at his mother, but she hadn't turned when 

she  spoke.  She  seemed  to  be  addressing  the  birds.  "I'm  just  going  to  tell  you  this,"  she 

replied.  "Don't  bring  any  murderers  into  my  house."  Having  finished  with  the  cages,  she 

occupied herself entirely with her son: "And you, where have you been?" 

That morning Judge Arcadio thought he'd discovered ominous signs in the minute 

episodes that  make  up daily life. "It  gives you a  headache,"  he said, trying  to explain  his 

uneasiness  to  his  wife.  It  was  a  sunny  morning.  The  river,  for  the  first  time  in  several 

weeks,  had  lost  its  menacing  look  and  its  raw-meat  smell.  Judge  Arcadio  went  to  the 

barbershop. 

"Justice," the barber received him, "limps along, but it gets there all the same." 

The floor had been oiled and the mirrors were covered with brushstrokes of white 

lead. The barber began to polish them with a rag while Judge Arcadio settled into the chair. 

"There shouldn't be such things as Mondays," the judge said. 

The barber had begun to cut his hair. 

"It's all Sunday's fault," he said. "If it weren't for Sunday," he stated with a merry 

air, "there wouldn't be any Mondays." 

Judge Arcadio closed his eyes. That time, after ten hours of sleep, a turbulent act 

of love, and a prolonged bath, there was nothing to reproach Sunday for. But it was a thick 

Monday.  When  the clock in  the  tower struck  nine and in place of  the pealing of  the bell 

there  was  the  hiss  of  a  sewing  machine  next  door,  another  sign  made  Judge  Arcadio 

shudder: the silence in the streets. 

"This is a ghost town," he said. 

"You people wanted it that way," the barber said. "Before, on a Monday morning, 

I would have cut at least five heads of hair by now. Today God's first gift to me is you." 

Judge  Arcadio  opened  his  eyes  and  for  a  moment  contemplated  the  river  in  the 

mirror. "You people," he repeated. And he asked: "Who are we?" 

 

"You  people."  The  barber  hesitated.  "Before  you  people  this  was  a shitty  town, 

like all of them, but now it's the worst of them all." 

"If  you're  telling  me  these  things,"  the  judge  replied,  "it's  because  you  know  I 

haven't had anything to do with them. Would you dare," he asked without being aggressive, 

"say the same thing to the lieutenant?" 

The barber admitted he wouldn't. 

"You  don't  know  what  it's  like,"  he  said,  "getting  up  every  morning  with  the 

certainty that they're going to kill you and ten years pass without their killing you." 

"I don't know," Judge Arcadio admitted, "and I don't want to know." 

"Do everything possible," the barber said, "so that you'll never know." 

The judge lowered his head. After a prolonged silence, he asked: "Do  you  know 

something,  Guardiola?"  Without  waiting  for  an  answer  he  went  on:  "The  lieutenant  is 

sinking deep into this  town. And  he sinks in deeper every day because  he's discovered a 

pleasure from which  there's no turning back: little by little, without  making a lot of noise, 

he's getting rich." Since the barber was listening to  him in silence, he concluded: "I'll bet 

you that he won't be responsible for a single death more." 

"Do you think so?" 

"I'll bet you a hundred to one," Judge Arcadio insisted. "At this moment there's no 

better business for him than peace." 

The  barber  finished  cutting  his  hair,  tilted  the  chair  back,  and  shifted  the  sheet 

without speaking. When he finally did, there was a thread of uneasiness in his voice. 

"It's strange that you should be the one to say that," he said, "and to say it to me." 

If his position had allowed it, Judge Arcadio would have shrugged his shoulders. 

"It's not the first time I've said it," he stated. 

"The lieutenant's your best friend," the barber said. 

He'd  lowered  his  voice  and  it  was  tense  and  confidential.  Concentrating  on  his 

work, he had the same expression a person not in the habit of writing has when he signs his 

name. 

 

"Tell  me  one  thing,  Guardiola,"  Judge  Arcadio  asked  with  a  certain  solemnity. 

"What impression do you have of me?" 

The barber had begun to shave him. He thought for a moment before answering. 

"Until  now,"  he  said,  "I'd  have  thought  that  you're  a  man  who  knows  that  he's 

leaving and wants to leave." 

"You can keep on thinking that." The judge smiled. 

He  let  himself  be  shaved  with  the  same  gloomy  passivity  with  which  he  would 

have let his throat be cut. He  kept  his eyes closed while the barber rubbed his jaw with a 

piece of alum, powdered him, and brushed off the powder with a very soft brush. When he 

took the sheet from around his neck, he slipped a piece of paper into his shirt pocket. 

"You're only mistaken about one thing, Judge," he told him. "There's going to be a 

great big mess in this country." 

Judge  Arcadio  checked  to  see  that  they  were  still  alone  in  the  barbershop.  The 

burning  sun,  the  hiss  of  the  sewing  machine  in  the  nine-thirty  silence,  the  unavoidable 

Monday, indicated something  more to him: they seemed  to be alone in the town. Then he 

took the piece of paper out of his pocket and read it. 

The  barber  turned  his  back  to  him  and  put  his  shelf  in  order.  "  'Two  years  of 

speeches," 

" he quoted from memory. " 'And still the same state of siege, the same censorship 

of  the  press,  the  same  old  officials.'  "  On  seeing  in  the  mirror  that  Judge  Arcadio  had 

stopped reading, he told him: "Pass it around." 

The judge put the paper back in his pocket. 

"You're very brave," he said. 

"If I'd ever made a mistake about anybody," the barber said, "I'd have been full of 

lead  years  ago."  Then  he  added  in  a  serious  voice,  "And  remember  one  thing,  Judge. 

Nobody's going to be able to stop it this time." 

When he left the barbershop, Judge Arcadio felt his palate was all dry. He asked 

for two double shots at the poolroom, and after drinking them, one after the other, he saw 

 

that he still had a lot of time to kill. At the university, one Holy Saturday, he'd tried to apply 

a jackass cure to uncertainty: he went into  the toilet of a bar, perfectly sober, threw some 

gunpowder on a chancre, and lighted it. 

With the fourth drink, Don Roque moderated the dosage. "At this rate"--he smiled-

-"they'll carry you out on their shoulders like a bullfighter." He,  too, smiled with his lips, 

but  his eyes were still extinguished.  A  half  hour later  he went  to  the toilet,  urinated, and 

before leaving flushed the clandestine note down the toilet. 

When he got back to the bar he found the bottle next to the glass, the level of the 

contents  marked  with  a  line  in  ink.  "That's  all  for  you,"  Don  Roque  told  him,  fanning 

himself slowly. They were alone in  the place. Judge  Arcadio poured  himself  half a  glass 

and  began  to  drink  slowly.  "Do  you  know  something?"  he  asked.  And  since  Don  Roque 

showed no signs of having understood, he told him: "There's going to be a great big mess." 

Don  Sabas  was  weighing  his  bird  breakfast  on  the  scale  when  he  was  told  of 

another visit by Mr. Carmichael. "Tell him I'm sleeping," he whispered into his wife's ear. 

And indeed, ten minutes later he was asleep. When he awoke, the air had become dry again 

and the house was paralyzed with the heat. It was after twelve. 

"What did you dream about?" his wife asked. 

"Nothing." 

She'd waited for her husband to awaken without being roused. A moment later she 

boiled the  hypodermic syringe and Don Sabas  gave  himself an injection of insulin in the 

thigh. 

"It's been about three years now that you haven't dreamed anything," his wife said 

with slow disenchantment. 

"God damn it," he exclaimed. "What do you want now? A person can't be forced 

to dream." 

Years  before,  in  a  brief  midday  dream,  Don  Sabas  had  dreamed  of  an  oak  tree 

which,  instead  of  flowers,  bore  razor  blades.  His  wife  interpreted  the  dream  and  won  a 

piece of the lottery. 

 

"If not today, tomorrow," she said. 

"It wasn't today and it won't be tomorrow," Don Sabas replied impatiently. "I'm 

not going to dream just so you can act like a jackass." 

He stretched out again on the bed while his wife put the room in order. All types of 

cutting or stabbing instruments  had been banished from the room.  When a  half  hour  had 

passed, Don Sabas arose in varying tempos, trying not to excite himself, and began to dress. 

"So," he asked then, "what did Carmichael say?" 

"That he'll be back later." 

They didn't speak again until they were sitting at the table. Don Sabas picked at his 

uncomplicated sick man's diet. She served herself a full lunch, at first sight too abundant for 

her fragile body and languid expression. She'd thought it over a lot before she decided to 

ask: "What is it that Carmichael wants?" 

Don Sabas didn't even lift his head. 

"Money. What else?" 

"I  thought  so,"  the  woman  sighed.  And  she  went  on  piously:  "Poor  Carmichael, 

rivers of money passing through his hands for so many years and living off public charity." 

As she spoke, she lost her enthusiasm for lunch. 

"Give  it  to  him,  Sabitas,"  she  begged.  "God  will  reward  you."  She  crossed  her 

knife and fork over the plate and asked, intrigued: "How much does he need?" 

"Two hundred pesos," Don Sabas answered imperturbably. 

"Two hundred pesos!" 

"Just imagine!" 

Completely  unlike Sunday, which was his busiest day, Don Sabas had a peaceful 

afternoon  on  Mondays.  He  could  spend  long  hours  in  his  office,  dozing  in  front  of  the 

electric fan while the cattle grew, fattened, and  multiplied on his ranches. That afternoon, 

however, he couldn't manage an instant of rest. 

"It's the heat," the woman said. 

 

Don  Sabas  let  a  spark  of  exasperation  be  seen  in  his  faded  eyes.  In  the  narrow 

office, with an old wooden desk, four leather easy chairs, and harnesses piled in the corners, 

the blinds had been drawn and the air was warm and thick. 

"It could be," he said. "It's never been this hot in October." 

"Fifteen  years  ago,  when  there  was  heat  like  this,  there  was an  earthquake,"  his 

wife said. "Do you remember?" 

"I  don't  remember,"  said  Don  Sabas  distractedly.  "You  know  that  I  never 

remember  anything.  Besides,"  he  added  grouchily,  "I'm  in  no  mood  to  talk  about 

misfortunes this afternoon." 

Closing  his  eyes,  his  arms  crossed  over  his  stomach,  he  feigned  sleep.  "If 

Carmichael comes," he murmured, "tell him I'm not in." An expression of entreaty altered 

his wife's face. 

"You're in a bad mood," she said. 

But he didn't speak again. She left the office without making the slightest sound as 

she closed the screen door. Toward dusk, after  having really slept, Don Sabas opened  his 

eyes and in  front of  him, like  the prolongation of a dream,  he saw the  mayor waiting for 

him to wake up. 

"A man like you"--the lieutenant smiled--"shouldn't sleep with the door open." 

Don Sabas showed no expression that could reveal his upset. "For you,"  he said, 

"the doors of my house are always open." He reached out his hand to ring the bell, but the 

mayor stopped him with a gesture. 

"Don't you want some coffee?" Don Sabas asked. 

"Not right now," the mayor said, looking over the room with a nostalgic glance. "It 

was very nice here while you were asleep. It was like being in a different town." 

Don Sabas rubbed his eyelids with the back of his fingers. 

"What time is it?" 

The  mayor looked at  his watch. "It's going on five,"  he said. Then, changing  his 

position in the chair, he softly went into what he wanted to say. 

 

"So shall we talk?" 

"I suppose," said Don Sabas, "that I've got very little choice." 

"It  wouldn't  be  worth  the  trouble  not  to,"  the  mayor  said.  "After  all,  this  isn't  a 

secret to anybody." And with the same restful fluidity, without  forcing  his gestures or his 

words at any moment, he added: "Tell me one thing, Don Sabas: how many head of cattle 

belonging  to the widow Montiel have  you  had cut out and branded with  your  mark since 

she offered to sell to you?" 

Don Sabas shrugged his shoulders. 

"I haven't got the slightest idea." 

"You remember," the mayor stated, "that a thing like that has a name." 

"Rustling." Don Sabas was precise. 

"That's right," the mayor confirmed. "Let us say, for example," he went on without 

changing his tone, "that you've cut out two hundred head in three days." 

"I wish I had," Don Sabas said. 

"Two hundred, let's say," the mayor said. "You know what the conditions are: fifty 

pesos a head in municipal tax." 

"Forty." 

"Fifty." 

Don Sabas  made a pause of resignation.  He was leaning against the back of the 

swivel chair, turning the ring wkh the polished black stone on his finger, his eyes fixed on 

an imaginary chessboard. 

The  mayor was observing him with an attention completely devoid of pity. "This 

time, however, things don't stop there," he went on. "From this moment on, wherever they 

might be, all cattle belonging to the estate of José Montiel are under the protection of the 

town  government."  Having  waited  uselessly  for  a  reaction,  he  explained:  "That  poor 

woman, as you know, is completely mad." 

"What about Carmichael?" 

"Carmichael," the mayor said, "has been in custody for two hours." 

 

Don  Sabas  examined  him  then  with  an  expression  that  could  have  been  one  of 

devotion  or  one  of  stupor.  And  without  any  warning,  the  bland  and  voluminous  body 

exploded over the desk, shaken by uncontainable interior laughter. 

"What a miracle, Lieutenant," he said. "This all must seem like a dream to you." 

At dusk Dr. Giraldo possessed the certainty of having gained much ground on the 

past. The almond  trees on the square were dusty again.  A new winter was passing, but its 

stealthy  footprints  were  leaving  a  profound  imprint  in  his  memory.  Father  ءngel  was 

returning  from his afternoon walk when  he found the doctor trying  to put his key into the 

lock of his office. 

"You see, Doctor." He smiled. "Even to open a door you need the help of God." 

"Or a flashlight." The doctor smiled in turn. 

He turned the  key in the lock and then  gave all his attention to Father Angel. He 

saw  him  thick  and  hazy  in  the  dusk.  "Wait  a  moment,  Father,"  he  said.  "I  don't  think 

everything's working right with your liver." He held him by the arm. 

"You don't think so?" 

The doctor turned on the light by the doorway and with an attention more personal 

than professional examined the curate's face. Then he opened the screen door and turned on 

the light in the office. 

"It  wouldn't  be  too  much  to  devote  five  minutes  to  your  body,  Father,"  he  said. 

"Let's have a look at that blood pressure." 

Father ءngel was in a hurry. But at the doctor's insistence  he went into the office 

and prepared his arm for the sphygmomanometer. 

"In my time," he said, "those things didn't exist." 

Dr.  Giraldo  put  a  chair  in  front  of  him  and  sat  down  to  apply  the 

sphygmomanometer. 

"This is your time, Father." He smiled. "Your body won't let you out of it." 

While  the  doctor  was  studying  the  dial,  the  curate  examined  the  room  with  that 

boobish  curiosity  that  consulting  rooms  tend  to  inspire.  Hanging  on  the  walls  were  a 

 

yellowing diploma, the print of a ruddy-faced girl with one cheek eaten away in blue, and 

the painting of a doctor fighting with death over a naked woman. In  the back, behind the 

white iron cot, there was a cabinet with labeled bottles. Beside the window a glass cabinet 

with instruments and two others crammed with books. The only smell that could be defined 

was that of denatured alcohol. 

Dr.  Giraldo's  face  didn't  reveal  anything  when  he  finished  taking  the  blood 

pressure. 

"You need a saint in this room," Father ءngel murmured. 

The  doctor  examined  the  walls.  "Not  just  here,"  he  said.  "He's  needed  all  over 

town."  He  put  the  sphygmomanometer  away  in  a  leather  case  and  closed  it  with  an 

energetic tug on  the  zipper, and said: "You ought to  know one thing, Father: your blood 

pressure's fine." 

"I imagined so," the curate said. And he added with a languid perplexity: "I never 

felt better in October." 

He slowly began to roll his sleeve down. With his cassock with darned edges, his 

cracked shoes, and the harsh hands with nails that were like singed horn, at that instant his 

essential condition prevailed: he was an extremely poor man. 

"Still," the doctor replied, "I'm worried about you. You have to recognize that your 

daily routine isn't the best for an October like this one." 

"Our Lord is demanding," the priest said. 

The doctor turned his back to him to look at the dark river through the window. "I 

wonder to what point," he said. "It doesn't seem to be God's work, this business of trying so 

hard  for  so  many  years  to  cover  people's  instinct  with  armor,  knowing  full  well  that 

underneath it all everything goes on the same." And after a long pause he asked: "Haven't 

you had the impression that during the last few days his implacable work has begun to fall 

apart?" 

"Every night for all of my life I've had that impression," Father ءngel said. "That's 

why I know that I've got to begin with more strength the next day." 

 

He  had stood  up. "It's  going on six,"  he said, getting ready  to leave the doctor's 

office. Without moving from the window, the doctor seemed to put an arm in his path to tell 

him: "Father: one of these nights put your hand on your heart and ask yourself if you're not 

trying to put bandages on morality." 

Father ءngel couldn't  hide a terrible inner suffocation. "At  the  hour of death,"  he 

said,  "you'll  learn  how  heavy  those  words  are,  Doctor."  He  said  good  night  and  softly 

closed the door as he left. 

He couldn't concentrate on his prayers. When he was closing up the church, Mina 

came over to tell him that only one  mouse  had fallen in  two days. He had  the impression 

that  with  Trinidad's  absence  the  mice  had  proliferated  to  the  point  of  threatening  to 

undermine the church. Still, Mina had set the traps. She'd poisoned the cheese, followed the 

trail of the young ones, and plugged up the new nests that he himself helped her to find with 

tar. 

"Put a little faith into your work," he'd told her, "and the mice will come into the 

traps like lambs." 

He gave a lot of turns on the bare mattress before falling asleep. In the enervation 

of wakefulness he became fully aware of the obscure feeling of defeat  that the doctor had 

implanted  in  his  heart.  That  disquiet,  and  then  the  troop  of  mice  in  the  church  and  the 

frightful paralysis of the curfew, all plotted so that a blind force would drag  him into the 

turbulence of his most fearsome memory: Having just arrived in town, he'd been awakened 

in  the  middle  of  the  night  to  give  the  last  rites  to  Nora  Jacob.  He'd  received  a  dramatic 

confession, given in a serene way, concise and detailed, in a bedroom prepared to receive 

death:  all  that  remained  were  a  crucifix  at  the  head  of  the  bed  and  several  empty  chairs 

against the walls. The dying woman  had revealed to him  that  her husband, Nestor Jacob, 

was not  the  father of  the daughter who  had just been born. Father  ءngel had conditioned 

absolution on her repeating the confession and finishing the act of contrition in the presence 

of her husband. 

 

CHAPTER 10 

OBEYING  the rhythmic orders of the impresario, the  gangs pulled up the stakes and the 

canvas deflated in a solemn catastrophe, with a moaning whistle like that of the wind in the 

trees. By dawn it was folded up and the women and children were eating breakfast among 

the trunks, while the men put the wild animals on board. When the launches gave their first 

whistle, the marks left by the bonfires on the vacant lot were the only sign that a prehistoric 

animal had passed through the town. 

The mayor hadn't slept. After watching the loading of the circus from the balcony, 

he mingled in the turmoil of the port, still wearing his field uniform, his eyes irritated from 

lack of sleep, and his face hardened by a two-day beard. The impresario spotted him from 

the roof of the launch. 

"Hello, Lieutenant," he shouted to him. "I leave you your kingdom there." 

He was wrapped in ample and worn overalls, which gave his round face a priestly 

air. He carried the whip rolled in his fist. 

The  mayor  went  over  to  the  edge  of  the  dock.  "I'm  sorry,  General,"  he  shouted 

good-humoredly in  turn,  his arms open. "I  hope that  you'll be honest enough to  tell them 

why you're leaving." He turned to the crowd and explained in a loud voice: "I revoked his 

license because he refused to give a free performance for the children." 

The  final  whistle  of  the  launches  and  the  noise  of  the  engines  drowned  out  the 

impresario's reply. The water exhaled a breath of stirred mud. The impresario waited until 

the launches had made their turn in the middle of the river. Then he leaned over the rail and 

using his hands as a megaphone, he shouted with all the power of his lungs: "Goodbye, you 

son-of-a-bitch cop." 

The mayor didn't react. He waited, his hands in his pockets, until the sound of the 

engines  disappeared.  Then  he  made  his  way  through  the  crowd,  smiling,  and  went  into 

Moisés the Syrian's shop. 

It  was  almost  eight  o'clock.  The  Syrian  had  begun  to  put  away  the  merchandise 

exhibited by the door. 

 

"So you're leaving too," the mayor said to him. 

"In a little while," the Syrian said, looking at the sky, "it's going to rain." 

"It doesn't rain on Wednesdays," the mayor stated. 

He leaned his elbows on the counter, observing the thick clouds that floated over 

the docks until the Syrian finished putting away the merchandise and told his wife to bring 

them some coffee. 

"At  this rate"--he sighed as if to  himself--"we'll have to get people on loan  from 

other towns." 

The  mayor drank  his coffee with spaced sips. Three more families had left town. 

With them, according to Moisés the Syrian's calculations, it made five that had left in one 

week. 

"Sooner  or  later  they'll  be  back,"  the  mayor  said.  He  scrutinized  the  enigmatic 

marks  left  by  the  coffee  in  the  bottom  of  the  cup  and  commented  with  an  absent  air: 

"Wherever they go, they'll remember that their umbilical cords are buried in this town." 

In  spite  of  his  prognostication,  he  had  to  wait  in  the  store  for  the  passing  of  a 

violent cloudburst that sank the town into a deluge for a few minutes. Then he went to the 

police  barracks  and  found  Mr.  Carmichael,  still  sitting  on  a  stool  in  the  center  of  the 

courtyard, soaked by the downpour. 

He  paid  no  attention  to  him.  After  receiving  the  report  from  the  policeman  on 

guard,  he  had  them open  the cell where Pepe Amador seemed  to be in a deep sleep face 

down on the brick floor. He turned him over with his foot and for a moment observed with 

secret pity the face disfigured by the blows. 

"How long since he's eaten?" he asked. 

"Since night before last." 

He ordered them to pick  him  up.  Dragging  him by  the armpits,  three policemen 

hauled the body through the cell and sat it on the concrete platform jutting from the wall at 

a height of two feet. In the place where his body had been, a damp shadow remained. 

 

While two policemen held him sitting up, another supported his head by grasping 

the hair. One would have thought that he was dead but for the irregular breathing and the 

expression of infinite weariness on his lips. 

On being abandoned by the policemen, Pepe Amador opened his eyes, gripped the 

edge of the concrete by feel. Then he lay down on the platform with a hoarse moan. 

The mayor left the cell and ordered them to give him something to eat and let him 

sleep awhile. "Then," he said, "keep working on him until he spits up everything he knows. 

I don't think he'll be able to resist for long." From the balcony he saw Mr. Carmichael in the 

courtyard, his face in his hands, huddled on the stool. 

"Rovira," he called. "Go to Carmichael's house and tell his wife to send him some 

clothes. Then," he added in a peremptory way, "bring him to the office." 

He'd begun to fall asleep, leaning on the desk, when they knocked on the door. It 

was Mr. Carmichael, dressed in white and completely dry, with the exception of the shoes, 

which  were  swollen  and  soft  like  those  of  a  drowned  man.  Before  dealing  with  him,  the 

mayor ordered the policeman to come back with a pair of shoes. 

Mr. Carmichael raised an arm toward the policeman.  "I'm all right this way,"  he 

said. And then, addressing the  mayor with a look of severe dignity,  he explained: "These 

are the only ones I own." 

The mayor had him sit down. Twenty-four hours earlier Mr. Carmichael had been 

led  into  the  armored  office  and  subjected  to  an  intense  interrogation  concerning  the 

situation of the Montiel estate. He had given a detailed exposition. Finally, when the mayor 

revealed  his  proposal  to  buy  the  estate  at  a  price  fixed  by  municipal  experts,  he  had 

announced his inflexible determination not to permit it until the will had been probated. 

That afternoon, after two days of  hunger and exposure to  the elements,  his reply 

revealed the same inflexibility. 

"You're a mule, Carmichael," the  mayor told  him. "If  you wait for the will to be 

probated, that bandit Don Sabas will have put his brand on all the Montiel cattle." 

Mr. Carmichael shrugged his shoulders. 

 

"All right," the mayor said after a long pause. "We all know that you're an honest 

man.  But remember one thing: five years ago  Don Sabas gave  José Montiel the complete 

list of the people in contact with the guerrilla groups, and that's why he was the only leader 

of the opposition who could remain in town." 

"Another one stayed," Mr. Carmichael said with a touch of sarcasm. "The dentist." 

The mayor ignored the interruption. 

"Do you think that a man like that, capable of selling out his own people, is going 

to care if you've been sitting outside for twenty-four hours rain or shine?" 

Mr. Carmichael lowered his head and began to look at  his nails. The mayor sat on 

the desk. 

"Besides," he said finally in a soft tone, "think about your children." 

Mr. Carmichael didn't  know that  his wife and his two oldest children had visited 

the mayor the night before and he had promised them that he'd be released within twenty-

four hours. 

"Don't worry," Mr. Carmichael said. "They know how to take care of themselves." 

He didn't lift his head until he heard the mayor walking from one end of the office 

to the other. Then  he  gave a sigh and said: "You still have another way out,  Lieutenant." 

Before continuing, he looked at him with soft gentleness: "Shoot me." 

He didn't receive any reply. A moment later the mayor was sleeping deeply in his 

room and Mr. Carmichael had gone back to the stool. 

Only  two  blocks  away  from  the  barracks,  the  secretary  of  the  court  was  happy. 

He'd spent the morning dozing in the back of the office, and without being able to avoid it, 

he'd  seen  the  splendid  breasts  of  Rebeca  Asيs.  It  was  like  a  lightning  flash  at  noon: 

suddenly the door of the bathroom had opened and the fascinating woman, with nothing on 

but a towel wrapped around her head, gave a silent shout and hurried to close the window. 

For half an hour the secretary went on suffering the bitterness of that hallucination 

in the  half light of the office. Toward twelve o'clock he put  the padlock on the door and 

went to feed his memory something. 

 

As he passed by the telegraph office, the postmaster signaled to him. "We're going 

to have a new priest," he told him. "The widow Asيs wrote a letter to the apostolic prefect." 

The secretary waved him off. 

"The greatest virtue in a man," he said, "is knowing how to keep a secret." 

On the corner of the square  he ran into Mr.  Benjamيn, who was thinking twice 

before leaping over the puddles in front of his store. "If you only knew, Mr. Benjamيn," the 

secretary began. 

"What?" asked Mr. Benjamيn. 

"Nothing," the secretary said. "I'll carry this secret with me to the grave." 

Mr.  Benjamيn  shrugged  his  shoulders.  He  watched  the  secretary  leap  over  the 

puddles with such a youthful agility that he, too, threw himself into the adventure. 

In  his  absence  someone  had  placed  a  lunch  carrier in  three  sections,  plates,  and 

silverware, and a folded tablecloth, in  the rear of the store. Mr. Benjamيn spread out the 

cloth on the table and put the things in order to have lunch. He did everything with extreme 

neatness. First he had the soup, yellow, with a large circle of grease floating, and a stripped 

bone.  On another plate  he ate white rice, roasted meat, and a piece of fried cassava. The 

heat was starting up, but  Mr. Benjamيn paid no attention to it. When  he'd finished lunch, 

having piled up the plates and put the sections of the lunch carrier in place, he drank a glass 

of water. He was getting ready to  hang  up  his hammock when  he  heard someone coming 

into the store. 

A sleepy voice asked: "Is Mr. Benjamيn here?" 

He stuck out his neck and saw a woman dressed in black with her hair wrapped in 

a towel and ash-colored skin. It was Pepe Amador's mother. 

"I'm not in," Mr. Benjamيn said. 

"It's you," the woman said. 

"I know," he said, "but it's just as if I weren't because I know why you're looking 

for me." 

 

The  woman  hesitated  by  the  small  door  to  the  rear  of  the  shop,  while  Mr. 

Benjamيn finished putting up the hammock. With every breath a thin whistle escaped from 

her lungs. 

"Don't stand there," Mr. Benjamيn said harshly. "Go away or come in." 

The woman occupied the chair by the table and began to sob in silence. 

"Excuse  me,"  he said. "You have to realize that you compromise  me by standing 

there in sight of everybody." 

Pepe Amador's mother uncovered her head and dried her eyes with the towel. Out 

of pure habit, Mr. Benjamيn tested the resistance of the ropes when he finished putting up 

the hammock. Then he saw to the woman. 

"So," he said, "you want me to write you a writ." 

The woman nodded. 

"That's right," Mr. Benjamيn went on. "You go right on believing in writs. These 

days,"  he  explained,  lowering  his  voice,  "justice  doesn't  depend  on  writs;  it  depends  on 

bullets." 

"Everybody says the same thing," she answered, "but the fact is that I'm the only 

one whose boy is in jail." 

While she was talking she undid the knots on the handkerchief she'd been holding 

in her fist until then, and took out a few sweaty bills: eight pesos. She offered them to Mr. 

Benjamيn. 

"It's all I've got." 

Mr. Benjamيn observed the money. He shrugged his shoulders, took the bills, and 

laid them on the table. "I know it's useless," he said. "But I'm going to do it just to prove to 

God that I'm a stubborn man." The woman thanked him silently and began weeping again. 

"In any case," Mr. Benjamيn advised her, "try to get the mayor to let you see the 

boy and convince him to tell what he knows. Without that it would be like throwing writs to 

the hogs." 

She  wiped  her  nose  with  the  towel,  covered  her  head  again,  and  left  the  store 

without turning her face. 

 

Mr. Benjamيn slept his siesta until four o'clock. When he went into the courtyard 

to  wash,  the  weather  had  cleared  and  the  air  was  full  of  flying  ants.  After  changing  his 

clothes and combing the few threads of hair he had left, he went to the telegraph office to 

buy a sheet of stamped paper. 

He was corning back to the store to write the writ when he saw that something was 

happening in  town.  He  heard distant shouts.  He asked a  group of boys who ran past  him 

what  was  going  on,  and  they  answered  without  stopping.  Then  he  went  back  to  the 

telegraph office and returned the sheet of stamped paper. 

"I don't need it now," he said. "They've just killed Pepe Amador." 

Still  half  asleep,  carrying  his  belt  in  one  hand  and  buttoning  his  tunic  with  the 

other, the mayor went down the steps from his bedroom in two leaps. The color of the light 

mixed up his sense of time. He understood before he knew what was going on that he had 

to go to the barracks. 

The windows were being closed as he passed. A woman with her arms open came 

along in the middle of the street, running in the opposite direction. There were flying ants in 

the clean air. Still not knowing what was going on, the mayor unholstered his revolver and 

started to run. 

A group of women was trying to force the door of the barracks. Several men were 

struggling with them to keep them out. The mayor beat them away, put his back against the 

door, and aimed at all of them. 

"I'll drop anyone who takes a step." 

A policeman who'd been holding it from inside then opened the door, with his rifle 

at  the  ready,  and  blew  his  whistle.  Two  other  policemen  ran  out  onto  the  balcony,  fired 

several shots in the air, and the  group scattered to  the ends of  the street. At that  moment, 

howling  like  a  dog,  the  woman  appeared  on  the  corner.  The  mayor  recognized  Pepe 

Amador's  mother.  He  gave  a  leap  inside  the  barracks  and  from  the  stairway  ordered  the 

policeman: "Take charge of that woman." 

Inside  there  was  complete  silence.  The  mayor  really  didn't  find  out  what  had 

happened  until he  moved aside the policemen who were blocking the entrance  to the cell 

 

and saw Pepe Amador. Lying on the floor, curled up, he had his hands between his thighs. 

He was pale, but there were no signs of blood. 

After  convincing  himself  that  there  was  no  wound,  the  mayor  laid  the  body  out 

face up, tucked in the shيrttail, and buttoned the fly. Finally he fastened the belt. 

When he stood up he'd recovered his calm, but the expression with which he faced 

the policemen revealed a beginning of weariness. 

"Who did it?" 

"All of us," the blond giant said. "He tried to escape." 

The mayor looked at him thoughtfully, and for a few seconds seemed not to have 

anything else to say. "Nobody's going to buy that story," he said. He advanced toward the 

blond giant with his hand outstretched. 

"Give me your revolver." 

The policeman took off his belt and handed it over. Having replaced the two spent 

shells with new rounds, the mayor put them in his pocket and gave the revolver to another 

policeman.  The  blond  giant,  who,  seen  from  close  by,  seemed  illuminated  by  an  aura  of 

childishness, let himself be led to the next cell. There he got completely undressed and gave 

his clothes to the  mayor. Everything was done  unhurriedly, each one  knowing  the action 

that  corresponded  to  him,  as  in  a  ceremony.  Finally  the  mayor  himself  closed  the  dead 

man's cell and went out onto the courtyard balcony. Mr. Carmichael was still on the stool. 

Led  to  the  office,  he  didn't  respond  to  the  invitation  to  sit  down.  He  remained 

standing in front of the desk, with his clothes wet once more, and he barely moved his head 

when the mayor asked him if he'd been aware of everything. 

"Well, then," the mayor said. "I still haven't had time to think about what I'm going 

to do, or even if I'm going to do anything. But no matter what I do," he added, "remember 

this: like it or not, you're in on the deal." 

Mr. Carmichael remained absorbed in front of the desk, his clothes sticking to his 

body and a beginning of tumefaction in his skin, as if he still hadn't floated to the surface on 

his third night as a drowned man. The mayor waited uselessly for a sign of life. 

"So take the situation into account, Carmichael: we're partners now." 

 

He  said  it  gravely  and  even  with  a  touch  of  drama.  But  Mr.  Carmichael's  brain 

didn't seem  to register it. He remained  motionless facing the desk, swollen and sad, even 

after the armored door had closed. 

In front of the barracks two policemen held Pepe Amador's mother by the wrists. 

The three seemed to be at rest. The woman was breathing with a peaceful rhythm and her 

eyes were dry. But when the  mayor appeared in the door she gave off a  hoarse howl and 

shook  with  such  violence  that  one  of  the  policemen  had  to  let  her  go  and  the  other  one 

pinned her to the ground with a wrestling hold. 

The  mayor  didn't  look  at  her.  Bringing  the  other  policeman  with  him,  he 

confronted  the  group  that was witnessing  the struggle  from the corner. He didn't address 

anyone in particular. 

"Someone  of  you,"  he  said.  "If  you  want  to  avoid  something  worse,  take  this 

woman home." 

Still  accompanied  by  the  policeman,  he  made  his  way  through  the  group  and 

reached the courthouse. He found nobody there. Then he went to Judge Arcadio's house and 

pushing open the door without knocking, he shouted: "Judge." 

Judge  Arcadio's  wife,  overwhelmed  by  the  thick  humors  of  her  pregnancy, 

answered in the shadows. 

"He left." 

The mayor didn't move from the threshold. 

"For where?" 

"Where else would he go?" the woman said. "Some shitty whore place." 

The  mayor signaled the policeman to  go in. They passed by  the woman without 

looking at her. After turning the bedroom upside down and realizing that there weren't any 

men's things anywhere, they went back into the living room. 

"When did he leave?" the mayor asked. 

"Two nights ago," the woman said. 

The mayor needed a long pause to think. 

 

"That  son  of  a  bitch,"  he  suddenly  shouted.  "He  can  hide  a  hundred  feet 

underground, he can crawl back into the belly of his whore mother, but we'll haul him out 

dead or alive. The government has a very long arm." 

The woman sighed. 

"May God listen to you, Lieutenant." 

It was beginning to grow dark. There were still groups being kept at a distance by 

policemen at the corners of the barracks, but they'd taken Pepe Amador's mother home and 

the town seemed peaceful. 

The  mayor  went  straight  to  the  dead  man's  cell.  He  had  them  bring  a  piece  of 

canvas and, aided by the policeman, he put the cap and glasses on the corpse and wrapped it 

up. Then he looked in different parts of the barracks for pieces of cord and wire and tied the 

body  in  a  spiral  from  neck  to  ankles.  When  he  finished  he  was  sweating,  but  he  had  a 

recovered look. It was as if physically he had gotten rid of the weight of the corpse. 

Only  then  did  he  turn  on  the  light  in  the  cell.  "Get  the  shovel,  the  pick,  and  a 

lantern," he ordered the policeman. "Then call Gonzalez, go to the rear courtyard, and dig a 

good, deep  hole in  the rear, where it's drier." He said it as if  he'd been thinking  up each 

word as he said it. 

"And remember one messy thing for the rest of your life," he concluded. "This boy 

never died." 

Two hours later they still hadn't finished digging the grave. From the balcony, the 

mayor  realized  that  there  was  nobody  on  the  street  except  for  one  of  his  men  who  was 

mounting guard from corner to corner. He turned on the stairway light and went to relax in 

the darkest corner of the anteroom, hearing only the spaced cries of a distant curlew. 

Father Angel's voice drew him out of his meditation. He heard him first talking to 

the policeman on guard, then to someone who was with him, and lastly  he recognized the 

other voice. He remained leaning over in the folding chair, until he heard the voices again, 

inside the barracks now, and the first footsteps on the stairs. Then he reached  his left arm 

out in the dark and grabbed the carbine. 

 

When he saw him appear at the head of the stairs, Father ءngel stopped. Two steps 

behind was Dr. Giraldo, in a short jacket, white and starched, and a satchel in his hand. He 

displayed his sharpened teeth. 

"I'm  disappointed,  Lieutenant,"  he  said  in  a  good  humor.  "I've  been  waiting  all 

afternoon for you to call me to do the autopsy." 

Father  ءngel  had  his  transparent  and  peaceful  eyes  fixed  on  him,  and  then  he 

turned them on the mayor. The mayor smiled too. 

"There'll be no autopsy," he said, "since there's no dead body." 

"We want to see Pepe Amador," the curate said. 

Holding the carbine barrel down, the mayor continued talking to the doctor. "I do 

too," he said. "But there's nothing we can do." And he stopped smiling when he told him: 

"He escaped." 

Father ءngel came  up another step. The  mayor raised the carbine in his direction. 

"Stay right where you are, Father," he warned. In his turn, the doctor advanced a step. 

"Listen  to  one  thing,  Lieutenant,"  he  said,  still  smiling.  "It's  impossible  to  keep 

secrets in this town. Ever since four in the afternoon on everybody knows that they did the 

same thing to that boy that Don Sabas did with the donkeys he sold." 

"He escaped." 

Watching the doctor, he barely  had time  to put  himself on  guard as Father ءngel 

came up two steps all of a sudden with his arms uplifted. 

The mayor released the safety catch with a crisp blow by the edge of his hand and 

remained planted with his legs apart. 

"Halt," he shouted. 

The doctor grabbed the priest by the sleeve of his cassock. Father ءngel began to 

cough. 

"Let's play clean, Lieutenant," the doctor said. His voice hardened for the first time 

in a long while. "That autopsy has got to be done. Now we're going to clear up the mystery 

of the fainting spells prisoners have in this jail." 

 

"Doctor," the mayor said, "if you move from where you are, I'll shoot you down." 

He barely turned his glance toward the priest. "And that goes for you too, Father." 

The three remained motionless. 

"Besides,"  the  mayor  went  on,  addressing  the  priest,  "you  ought  to  be  pleased, 

Father. That boy was the one who was putting up the lampoons." 

"For God's love," Father ءngel began to say. 

The convulsive cough wouldn't let him go on. The mayor waited for the attack to 

pass. 

"Now just listen to this mess," he said to them. "I'm going to start counting. When 

I reach three, I'm going to fire at that door with my eyes closed. Just be aware of that, now 

and forevermore," he warned the doctor explicitly. "The little jokes are over. We're at war, 

Doctor." 

The doctor dragged Father ءngel away by the sleeve. He began his descent without 

turning his back on the mayor, and suddenly he began to laugh out loud. 

"I like it this way, General," he said. "Now we really are beginning to understand 

each other." 

"One," the mayor counted. 

They  didn't  hear  the  next  number.  When  they  separated  by  the  corner  of  the 

barracks, Father ءngel was demolished and had to turn his face away because his eyes were 

wet.  Dr.  Giraldo  gave  him  a  pat  on  the  shoulder  without  ceasing  to  smile.  "Don't  be  so 

surprised, Father," he told him. "All of this is life." On turning the corner by his house, he 

looked at his watch in the light of the lamppost: It was a quarter to eight. 

Father ءngel couldn't eat. After curfew sounded he sat down to write a letter, and 

he was leaning over the desk  until after  midnight while the thin drizzle erased the world 

around him. He wrote in an implacable way, forming even letters with a tendency toward 

preciosity,  and  he  did  it  with  such  passion  that  he  didn't  dip  his  pen  again  until  he'd 

scratched out as many as two invisible words, scraping the paper with the dry pen. 

On  the following day, after  mass, he put the letter in the  mail in spite of the  fact 

that it wouldn't  go out until Friday. During the  morning the air was damp and cloudy, but 

 

toward  noontime  it  became  diaphanous.  A  lost  bird  appeared  in  the  courtyard  and  spent 

almost a  half  hour  giving little invalid leaps among the spikenards. It sang a progressive 

note, rising up an octave each time until it became so sharp that one could only imagine it. 

On his twilight walk, Father ءngel felt certain that all afternoon he'd been followed 

by an autumnal fragrance. At Trinidad's house, while he kept up a sad conversation about 

the infirmities of October, he thought he identified the smell that Rebeca Asيs had exhaled 

in his study one night. 

On  his  way  back  he'd  visited  Mr.  Carmichael's  family.  The  wife  and  eldest 

daughter  were  disconsolate,  and  whenever  they  mentioned  the  prisoner's  name  they  hit  a 

false note. But the children were happy without their papa's severity, trying to make the pair 

of rabbits that the widow Montiel had sent them drink from a glass. Suddenly Father ءngel 

had interrupted the conversation and, making a sign in the air, had said: "Now I know: it's 

wolfsbane." 

But it wasn't wolfsbane. 

Nobody  talked  about  the  lampoons.  In  the  hubbub  of  the  latest  happenings  they 

were nothing but a picturesque anecdote of the past. Father ءngel had proof oي it during his 

evening walk and after prayers, chatting in his study with a group of Catholic Dames. 

When he was alone he felt hungry. He prepared himself some fried green banana 

slices and coffee with milk and accompanied it with a piece of cheese. The satisfaction of 

his stomach  made him forget the smell. While he was getting undressed to go to bed, and 

then inside the netting, hunting the mosquitoes that had survived the insecticide, he belched 

several times. He had acid, but his spirit was at peace. 

He  slept  like  a  saint.  He  heard,  in  the  silence  of  the  curfew,  the  emotional 

whispers, the preliminary testing of the chords tempered by the icy dawn, and lastly a song 

from another  time. At ten  minutes to five  he realized that  he was alive. He sat up with a 

solemn effort, rubbing his eyelids with  his fingers, and thought: Friday, October 21. Then 

he remembered aloud: "Saint Hilary." 

 

He got dressed without washing or praying. Having corrected the long buttoning of 

his cassock,  he put on  the cracked boots  for everyday wear, whose soles were becoming 

detached. On opening the door to the spikenards, he remembered the words of a song. 

" 'I'll be in your dreams till death,' " he sighed. 

Mina pushed open  the door of the church while he was giving  the  first ring. She 

went  to  the  baptistery  and  found  the  cheese  intact  and  the  traps  still  set.  Father  ءnge! 

finished opening the door onto the square. 

"Bad luck," Mina said, shaking the empty cardboard box. "Not a single one fell today." 

But Father ءngel didn't pay any attention. A brilliant day 'Was breaking, with pure, 

clean  air,  like  an  announcement  that  in  that  year,  too,  in  spite  of  everything,  December 

would be punctual. Pastor's silence had never seemed more definitive to him. 

"There was a serenade last night," he said. 

"Of lead," Mina confirmed. "There was shooting until just a little while ago." 

The priest looked at her for the first time. She, too, extremely pale, like her blind 

grandmother,  wore  the  blue  sash  of  a  lay  congregant.  But  unlike  Trinidad,  who  had  a 

masculine air, a woman was beginning to mature in her. 

"Where?" 

"All over," Mina said. "It seems they were going crazy looking for clandestine fliers. They 

say they lifted up the flooring of the barbershop, just by chance, and they found guns. The 

jail is full, but they say men are going into the jungle to join up with guerrilla bands." 

Father ءngel sighed. 

"I didn't notice anything," he said. 

He walked toward the back of the church. She followed him in silence to the main altar. 

"And that isn't anything," Mina said. "Last night, in spite of the curfew and in spite 

of the shooting..." 

Father  ءngel  stopped.  He  turned  his  parsimonious  eyes  of  innocent  blue  toward 

her. Mina also stopped, with the empty box under her arm, and she started a nervous smile 

before finishing the sentence. 

END 

